=== Page 1 (1 cols) ===
BOOK    REVIEWS                                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                           JOURNAL OF PSYCHOThERAPY PRACFICE AND RESEARCH           
              Cognitive Therapy: Basics and                                         
              Beyond                                                                
              By Judith S. Beck                                                     
              New York, Guilford Press, 1995,338 pages,                             
              ISBN 0-89862-847-4, $35.00                                            
              Reviewed byJesse H Wright, MD., Ph.D.                                 
             J                                                                      
               udith Beck has provided a great service to                           
                the field of psychotherapy by writing a step-                       
              by-step guidebook for learning and practicing                         
              cognitive therapy.                                                    
                 Cognitive Therapy: Basics and Beyond is                            
              packed with useful information that should                            
              help both novice and experienced therapists                           
              become better clinicians. In the tradition of                         
              Anna Freud, the author has distilled and ex-                          
              tended the groundbreaking work of a famous                            
              father. She has been remarkably successful in                         
              explaining the methods of cognitive therapy                           
              originated by Aaron T Beck and has added                              
              her own astute observations on how to be-                             
              come an accomplished cognitive therapist.                             
                 Simply put, this is the best book available                        
              for learning how to do cognitive therapy. Basic                       
              principles are clearly presented and illustrated                      
              with dialogue from typical therapy sessions.                          
              These illustrations should be especially useful                       
              to clinicians because they give a richly detailed                     
              picture of how to present cognitive therapy                           
              concepts and move successfully through the                            
              stages of treatment. Unlike other books on                            
              cognitive therapy, this volume is specifically                        
              directed at teaching therapy techniques. The                          
              historical background, theoretical issues, and                        
              research effort of this treatment approach are                        
              not covered in depth. Instead, the author gets                        
              directly to the point: how to perform cognitive                       
              therapy.                                                              
                 All of the basic procedures of cognitive                           
              therapy are included. The book begins with a                          
              cognitive conceptualization for treatment and                         
              then proceeds to instruct the reader on meth-                         
              ods of structuring therapy, working with auto-                        
              matic thoughts, modifying underlying beliefs,                         
              implementing homework assignments, using                              
              advanced cognitive and behavioral techniques,                         
                                           and reducing the risk of relapse. In each chap-
                                           ter, the most important points are highlighted
                                           by placing them in a gray tinted box. This
                                           format makes it very easy to capture the essence
                                           of the author’s message. For example, in chapter
                                           3, “Structure of the First Therapy Session,” 10
                                           specific methods are identified for structuring
                                           cognitive therapy. Each of these techniques is
                                           then described in detail.                
                                             Behaviorally oriented therapists should
                                           be forewarned that this book is focused pri-
                                           marily on cognitive conceptualizations and
                                           techniques. Although the author demonstrates
                                           how behavioral procedures such as activity
                                           scheduling, graded task assignments, and re-
                                           laxation can be incorporated into cognitive
                                           therapy, cognitive intentions are described in
                                           considerably more detail throughout the vol-
                                           ume. Even those therapists who prefer a be-
                                           havioral approach to treatment could benefit
                                           from reading Dr. Beck’s observations on the
                                           structure and process of cognitive therapy. Her
                                           description of methods for increasing home-
                                          work compliance, solving difficult therapy
                                           problems, and teaching patients to be their
                                           own therapists should be of interest to all
                                           clinicians.                              
                                             The majority of Cognitive Therapy: Basics
                                           and Beyond is devoted to the fundamentals of
                                           this form of treatment. Thus, it should be most
                                          useful for students and therapists who do not
                                           have an extensive background in cognitive
                                           therapy. For these individuals, the book will be
                                           an invaluable resource for assimilating the
                                          wisdom of a master cognitive therapist. Expe-
                                          rienced clinicians may wish to focus on the
                                          more challenging discussions of procedures
                                          for modifying core beliefs and handling the
                                          problematic aspects of therapy. The author’s
                                          insights on these later therapy topics are both
                                          pragmatic and highly creative. Her sugges-
                                          tions for use of a Core Belief Worksheet and
                                          restructuring early memories offer innovative
                                          solutions for changing deeply held maladap-
                                          tive beliefs.                             
                                             Cognitive Therapy: Basics and Beyond is so
                                          full of valuable material that it may overload
                                          the reader who tries to digest the information

=== Page 2 (1 cols) ===
72                                            BOOK REVIEWS           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                 VOLUME 6 #{149} NUMBER 1 #{149} WINTER 1997        
               too rapidly. This book will probably be of most                      
               help to those who are involved in learning                           
               cognitive therapy and can apply the lessons in                       
               a stepwise fashion. It is highly recommended                         
               to any clinician who wants to learn more about                       
               how to be an effective cognitive therapist.                          
               Judith Beck has written a classic volume that                        
               will be widely used as a standard text of teach-                     
               ing cognitive therapy.                                               
               Dr. Wright is Professor, Department of Psychiatry                    
               and Behavioral Sciences, University of Louisville                    
               School of Medicine, and Medical Director, Norton                     
               Psychiatric Clinic, Louisville, KY.                                  
               Ego Defenses: Theory and                                             
               Measurement (Einstein Psychiatry                                     
               Publications Series No. 10)                                          
               Edited by Hope R Conte and Robert Plutchik                           
               New York,John Wiley and Sons, 1995,                                  
               340 pages, ISBN 0-471-05233-7, $52.50                                
               Reviewed by Scott C. Bunce, Ph.D., and                               
               Philzs) Margolis, MD.                                                
                  sthe editors submit, the idea that the                            
                   ind employs mechanisms that can dis-                             
               tort or vanquish painful thoughts or feelings is                     
               one of the most widely accepted facets of                            
               psychoanalytic theory. There remains, how-                           
               ever, considerable debate over the precise                           
               meaning and function of these defenses. Conte                        
               and Plutchik have outlined several important                         
               questions in the literature: How many de-                            
               fenses are there? How shall we define them?                          
               Can they be arranged hierarchically by virtue                        
               of their level of adjustment? Are defenses                           
               adaptive or maladaptive, rigid or flexible? Can                      
               they be reliably and validly measured, and if                        
               so, how? Ego Defenses organized in two sec-                          
               tions of seven chapters each, presents the work                      
               of a number of authors who have suggested                            
               answers to these questions: Part I addresses                         
               theory, and Part II presents methods for the                         
               measurement of defenses.                                             
                 To remain a viable science of the mind,                            
                                           psychoanalytic theory must continue attempts
                                           to validate its assumptions and to integrate
                                           these findings with knowledge gleaned from
                                           other disciplines. For readers less versed in the
                                           literature, Buckley provides a well-written his-
                                           torical overview of the taxonomy and descrip-
                                           tion of defenses. The remainder of the   
                                           theoretical portion of this volume presents
                                           numerous efforts to integrate psychoanalytic
                                           thought with other perspectives.         
                                              Most of the authors have adhered to simi-
                                           lar definitions of defense, as theoretical ab-
                                           stractions that describe a particular way in
                                           which the mind works, a process by which 
                                           painful thoughts, feelings, or motives are ren-
                                           dered less potent. Finding the appropriate
                                           level of analysis, however, was perhaps the
                                           most vexing task facing the various authors at
                                           both theoretical and assessment levels. As
                                           each level of description has its costs and
                                           benefits, it is vital to choose a level of analysis
                                           appropriate for the phenomenon of interest.
                                           Safyer and Hauser suggest that the lack of
                                           crisp, empirical definitions of defenses and
                                           disagreement over a taxonomy have made   
                                           research on ego defenses difficult, in part ow-
                                           ing to difficulties in measurement. Agreement
                                           on an operational definition of defenses would
                                           increase our ability to focus empirical work,
                                           but this does not necessarily mean we should
                                           settle on a canon. Continued work on taxo-
                                           nomic issues has resulted in important theo-
                                           retical developments. Safyer and Hauser, for
                                           example, explore the question of whether de-
                                           fenses can be organized into a developmental
                                           continuum according to their level of maturity
                                           or their degree of pathology. Their own work
                                           suggests the predominant type of defense used
                                           by individuals may be affected by age, gender,
                                           ego development, or cognitive level.     
                                              Plutchik examines ego defenses within a
                                           psychoevolutionary theory of emotion. He ar-
                                           gues that there are eight basic emotions, and
                                           that a number of conceptual domains-per- 
                                           sonality traits, ego defenses, and diagno-
                                           ses-are derivatives of these eight emotions.
                                           One ego defense is thought to operate in re-
                                           sponse to one basic emotion plus anxiety. The

=== Page 3 (1 cols) ===
BOOK REVIEWS                                         73              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                           JOURNAL OF PSYCHOTHERAPY PRACTICE AND RESEARCH           
               scope of Plutchik’s attempt to integrate various                     
               levels of description is laudable. However, the                      
               specificity and precision of dynamic descrip-                        
               tion may be lost in his effort to gain systemic                      
               clarity. It is probably too simplistic to describe                   
               eight basic defenses as linked to eight basic                        
               emotions. Defenses are dynamic processes,                            
               usually defined by the process with which they                       
               neutralize the offensive material. The same                          
               mechanism could operate on any number of                             
               emotions, cognitions, or desires.                                    
                 The Horowitz and Stinson chapter implic-                           
               itly acknowledges the complexity inherent in                         
               research on unconscious mental processes. By                         
               taking a microanalytic approach to case mate-                        
               rial, their techniques exemplify important                           
               methodological considerations for defense                            
               analysis. They have shown how Freud’s de-                            
               scription of the interaction between conscious                       
               and unconscious processes might be ex-                               
               plained in light of recent cognitive science                         
               models of the mind. Within a parallel distrib-                       
               uted processing account of the mind, control                         
               processes are thought to determine which of                          
               many levels of unconscious processes will be                         
               allowed to become conscious, thereby allow-                          
               ing image distortions in the individual’s person                     
               schemas. They do not, however, articulate the                        
               motivational aspects of their theory well. Con-                      
               trol processes are proposed to modify thoughts                       
               and communication to avoid unwanted states                           
               of emotion, but the role of defenses vis-#{224}-vis                  
               motivation is not examined. This is trouble-                         
               some because there has been some conflation                          
               of emotion and motivation, particularly in the                       
               literature on emotion. The role of a defense is                      
               often either to keep a given desire or motive                        
               unconscious or to prevent acting on that desire                      
               when the consequences are too dire. This is                          
               underscored in Dahl’s chapter, where he inte-                        
               grates defenses with an information feedback                         
               theory of emotion. Dahl sees emotions as one                         
               of the primary systems we have for surviving                         
               in a dangerous world, facilitating communica-                        
               tion and the recognition of the intentions of                        
               other members of our own species. Defenses are                       
               thought to serve two primary functions in this                       
               theory: 1) to restrict awareness of emotional                        
                                           experiences and wishes and 2) to inhibit the
                                           acts related to the wishes.              
                                              Benjamin begins her chapter by suggest-
                                           ing that defenses need not offer protection
                                           from forbidden impulses, yet she reintroduces
                                           motivation as the realization of wishes or the
                                           avoidance of fears; hence, motivation plays
                                           a central role in her theory. Benjamin ex-
                                           tends defensive theory by operationalizing
                                           psychoanalytic hypotheses within an interper-
                                           sonal context, asserting that defenses can at
                                           times be adaptive, primarily when they pre-
                                           serve interpersonal relationships. This is not
                                           inconsistent with Freud; defenses allow us to
                                           operate in a social world with interpersonal
                                           constraints.                             
                                              Slavin and Grief invoke evolutionary the-
                                           ory to help decide the argument between clas-
                                           sic psychoanalytic views and object relational
                                           views of what gets repressed and why. As prod-
                                           ucts of evolution through inclusive fitness,
                                           parents necessarily have self-interests that
                                           compete with the interests of their offspring,
                                           and children must negotiate the parental world
                                           to survive. Because reproductive success relies
                                           on continuation of the genome, it is in the
                                           children’s best interest to repress competitive
                                           parts of the self necessary for future reproduc-
                                           tion. Reproductive success requires investment
                                           in both selfish interests and the social interests
                                           characteristic of object relational views.
                                              Methods of measurement should neces-  
                                           sarily derive from theoretical hypotheses
                                           concerning the variable of interest. The over-
                                           determined nature of psychoanalytic concep-
                                           tualizations of intra- and interpersonal 
                                           processes makes the assessment of defensive
                                           processes difficult, labor-intensive at best.
                                           Three approaches to the measurement of de-
                                           fense mechanisms are presented in this vol-
                                           ume: self-report inventories, projective 
                                           methods, and scales for rating clinical mate-
                                           rial. The development, reliabilities, and va-
                                           lidities are described for three self-report
                                           instruments, the Life Style Index (Conte and
                                           Apter), the Defense Style Questionnaire  
                                           (Bond), and the Defense Mechanism Inventory
                                           (Ihilevich and Gleser). Although self-report

=== Page 4 (1 cols) ===
74                                                                    
                                                           BooK                     
                                                               REVIEWS              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                VOLUME 6                                            
                                     #{149}                                         
                                      NUMBER!                                       
                                            #{149}                                  
                                            WINTER 1997                             
              inventories are convenient, and can offer pre-                        
              dictive validity, they have serious limitations                       
              for use in assessing dynamic defenses. Bond is                        
              appropriately cautious about the conclusions                          
              that can be drawn from self-report measures                           
              of defenses. Self-report is subject to the moti-                      
              vations and openness of the subjects at the                           
              time of their response, and at best, taps con-                        
              scious derivations of unconscious intrapsychic                        
              processes. Thus, high test-retest reliabilities                       
              probably reflect trait-like defensive styles, or                      
              the propensity to use particular defenses,                            
              rather than defenses per se. This limits their                        
              use to a particular range of psychodynamic                            
              hypotheses: those concerning character styles.                        
              These instruments can be useful as long as                            
              their limitations are acknowledged.                                   
                Two chapters address the assessment of                              
              defenses with projective measures, which pur-                         
              portedly allow the direct assessment of de-                           
              fenses because the ambiguous stimuli are                              
              thought to evoke actual defensive responses.                          
              The Defense Mechanism Profile Uohnson and                             
              Gold), a projective sentence completion in-                           
              strument, avoids a forced-choice format that                          
              might elicit responses that are neither accurate                      
              nor representative. The projective task helps                         
              establish ecological validity, but it is still vul-                   
              nerable to self-report biases-that is: Do the                         
              subject’s reports reflect actual situational re-                      
              sponses? Ritzler nicely summarizes and co-                            
              gently critiques several methods for assessing                        
              defenses by use of the Rorschach. His discus-                         
              sion exemplifies the complexity of defense                            
              measurement that contributes to the low valid-                        
              ity and reliability plaguing projective research.                     
              He appropriately emphasizes the need to vali-                         
              date existing schooling systems with behav-                           
              ioral or clinical observations of defenses.                           
                The last two chapters exemplify the meth-                           
              odological rigors necessary to capture a rela-                        
              tively unconscious intrapsychic process. Perry                        
              and Kardos review the Defense Mechanism                               
              Rating Scales (DMSR), one of two rating sys-                          
              tems in this volume that rely on extensive                            
              analysis of case material. The DMSR allows                            
              for good ecological validity and internal                             
              reliability, but falls prey to observer bias: it can                  
                                          be difficult for a rater, having identified a
                                          particular defense, to avoid “observing” clus-
                                          ters of related defenses. Bauer and Rockland
                                          have attempted to cope with this observer bias
                                          in their Inventory of Defense-Related Behav-
                                          iors by rating specified behaviors, rather than
                                          abstract “processes,” as present or absent in
                                          clinical material. However, defense mecha-
                                          nisms are abstractions, reflected in numerous
                                          behaviors, whereas any behavioral assessment
                                          instrument is limited by its taxonomy. This
                                          difference may result in the low interrater reli-
                                          abilities found for several defense mechanisms.
                                            Ego defenses represent complex, dy-     
                                          namic intrapsychic phenomena that must be 
                                          understood within a larger dynamic system of
                                          personality. This complexity contributes to a
                                          feeling that many of the authors could not do
                                          justice to the intricacies of their theories within
                                          the spatial limits of these chapters. Most of the
                                          chapters describe published work, however,
                                          and are well-referenced, so the motivated 
                                          reader can follow up on interesting concepts.
                                          Overall, it is encouraging to see both theoreti-
                                          cal and empirical work on psychoanalytic con-
                                          cepts. To remain a viable science of the mind
                                          and of clinical services, psychoanalysis must
                                          continue its dialectic within the field while
                                          integrating the best that other disciplines have to
                                          offer. This book is a step in the right direction.
                                          Dr. Margolis is Professor of Psychiatry, and Dr.
                                          Bunce is a postdoctoral fellow in psychology, Uni-
                                          versity ofMichigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI.
                                          Psychotherapy in the Age of               
                                          Accountability                            
                                          By Lynn D.Johnson                         
                                          New York and London,                      
                                                        WW.                         
                                                           Norton, 1995,            
                                          257 pages, ISBN 0-393-70209-X, $29.00     
                                          Reviewed by Marcia Krafi Goin, MD.        
                                          L                                         
                                             ynn D.Johnson writes with the authority
                                             of a long-time case management reviewer
                                          for one of the largest employee assistance

=== Page 5 (1 cols) ===
BOOK REVIEWS                                                         
                                                                    75              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                           JOURNAL OF PSYCHOTHERAPY PRACTICE AND RESEARCH           
               programs. He knows the needs and attitudes                           
               of the managed care administrators and has                           
               myriad opinions about the accountability of                          
               therapists across the country. His book informs                      
               the reader about a model of treatment that he                        
               believes achieves therapeutic success while                          
               working within the confines of a managed                             
               care system.                                                         
                 The first of the book’s three sections, “An                        
               Integrative Approach,” describes Johnson’s                           
               therapeutic technique, which makes use of                            
               aspects of behavioral, psychoanalytic, Gestalt,                      
               T-group, and other models of brief psychother-                       
               apy. Johnson believes that his technique                             
               achieves focused quality care in the shortest                        
               possible time. The second section, “Support-                         
               ive Concepts,” deals with the matter of time in                      
               psychotherapy (how much time is really nec-                          
               essary, time-limited and time-sensitive psy-                         
               chotherapy, and other issues) and with                               
               motivation and compliance. The final section,                        
               “Specific Applications,” discusses the applica-                      
               tion of time-sensitive, accountable, and effec-                      
               tive treatment in working with traumatized                           
               patients, adolescents, and those with alcohol                        
               and drug abuse problems.                                             
                 It is implied throughout the book that the                         
               restrictions placed on therapists by managed                         
               care will in fact benefit patients. The author                       
               envisions that the demands of managed care                           
               will provide an impetus for therapists to work                       
               faster to enable patients to get better within the                   
               delineated time limits. This view conveys the                        
               idea that for the most part therapists are self-                     
               serving miscreants who will dawdle along un-                         
               concerned about patient care until prodded                           
               into action by the almighty dollar. In my years                      
               of supervising the training of hundreds of psy-                      
               chiatric residents I have found the opposite to                      
               be true. Most therapists are humane and com-                         
               passionate professionals working to find the                         
               most effective way to help their patients.                           
                 Clinicians have long searched for speedier                         
               resolution of their patients’ problems. From                         
               the beginning of the development of psycho-                          
               analytic therapy, as Freud wrote in Analysis                         
               Terminable and Interminable, attempts have                           
               been made to “hasten the time-consuming                              
                                           process.” The setting of time limits, Mann’s
                                           focal therapy, and Alexander’s corrective
                                           emotional experience all represent our col-
                                           leagues’ concern with time and their efforts to
                                           shorten the process. With the advent of behav-
                                           ioral and cognitive therapy, clinicians hoped
                                           that treatment based on learning theory would
                                           achieve this goal. We have learned that certain
                                           problems do respond more readily to behav-
                                           ioral intervention and that certain patients are
                                           able to make productive use of homework  
                                           assignments and other practical techniques.
                                           Some patients can respond to these tech- 
                                           niques, but not all patients are alike. Although
                                           the author states that his focused technique can
                                           be used even with the most severely mentally
                                           ill patients, his section on the severely trauma-
                                           tized patient does not bear this out. In this
                                           section he states that the therapist is not the
                                           patient’s protector and “If the patient cannot
                                           remain safe, she must reach out to crisis agen-
                                           cies or emergency rooms.” A therapist cannot
                                           say this to a patient without completely abdi-
                                           cating professional responsibility. Besides
                                           abandoning responsibility, Johnson is relying
                                           on a system of care (crisis agencies and emer-
                                           gency rooms) that is rapidly disappearing.
                                              It has become all too common for treat-
                                           ment planning to be dictated by faceless re-
                                           viewers rendering clinical judgments through
                                           checklists on computer screens. Despite the
                                           limits set on treatment duration by managed
                                           care, it is the professionals who still bear the
                                           heavy burden of ultimate responsibility for
                                           their patients’ well-being--morally, ethically,
                                           and legally. This cardinal principle is not taken
                                           into account in this book.               
                                              Despite my misgivings, I believe this is a
                                           book worth reading. The treatment examples
                                           are instructive and thought provoking, and
                                           they include treatment techniques that may be
                                           helpful for certain patients. Primarily, it is a
                                           useful handbook for understanding the atti-
                                           tudes of managed care employees. Although
                                           neither fun nor conceptually provocative, the
                                           book will help you grasp reviewers’ perspec-
                                           tives and will educate you as to what they want
                                           to know and how you are accountable to them.

=== Page 6 (1 cols) ===
76                                           BooK REVIEWS            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                 VOLUME 6 #{149} NUMBER 1 #{149} WINTER 1997        
               Dr. Goin is Clinical Professor of Psychiatry, Uni-                   
               versity of Southern California School of Medicine,                   
               Los Angeles, CA.                                                     
               Achievement and Addiction:                                           
               A Guide to the Treatment of                                          
               Professionals                                                        
               By Edgar P.                                                          
                      Nace                                                          
               New York, Brunner/Mazel, 1995,264 pages,                             
               ISBN 0-87630-735-5, $32.95                                           
               Reviewed by Philz(cid:1)J. Flores, Ph.D.                             
               E                                                                    
                 dgar Nace has written an important book                            
                 about a subgroup of addicted patients that                         
               can sometimes be overlooked and neglected.                           
               He begins his book by confronting the stereo-                        
               types that are occasionally held about alcohol-                      
               ics, addicts, and substance abusers. He then                         
               explores ways in which many of these assump-                         
               tions and typical images do not fit when at-                         
               tempts are made to understand or explain why                         
               highly successful, intelligent, motivated, and                       
               achievement-oriented professionals succumb                           
               to a disorder that remains baffling to a large                       
               portion of the general population. Even                              
               though the general public’s attitude about ad-                       
               dictions is changing as the problem grows and                        
               more accurate information is made available,                         
               it is still a confusing disorder to many profes-                     
               sionals in the treatment community. Nace’s                           
               explanations of the phenomena of addiction                           
               take on added significance because he does                           
               not permit himself to escape into stereotypes                        
               about its causes. For instance, although he pays                     
               homage to the disease concept of addiction, he                       
               avoids the pat answer that addiction is just a                       
               disease. He recognizes that a number of vari-                        
               ables influence the addiction process. Genetics,                     
               personality, social influences, peer pressure,                       
               availability of the drug or substance, interper-                     
               sonal psychodynamics, subtle interactions of                         
               grandiose defenses with shameful affect, and                         
               neurological/biochemical influences all com-                         
               bine to produce a predictable but complicated                        
               process that is called addiction.                                    
                                              Nace’s effort to identify and explain the
                                           interplay between these forces is both the
                                           strength and one of the main weaknesses of his
                                           book. His dissecting of the variables that
                                           influence and contribute to addiction is very
                                           helpful in familiarizing the reader with the
                                           special set of circumstances that confront the
                                           addicted professional. Consequently, his in-
                                           sights provide a useful perspective on the ways
                                           that these influences can make diagnosis and
                                           treatment more difficult for this population.
                                           On the other hand, Nace comes precariously
                                           close to furthering the belief that an addicted
                                           professional is unique, special, or different
                                           from other addicts or alcoholics. Successful
                                           treatment of addiction, especially in the begin-
                                           ning, requires that more emphasis be placed
                                           on the similarities among those who are ad-
                                           dicted than on the differences that may exist.
                                           Nace, to his credit, addresses this issue later in
                                           his book when he writes about the different
                                           strategic approaches to treatment for early-
                                           stage and later-stage patients. However, one
                                           book cannot be all things to everyone, and
                                           Nace’s intent is clearly to identify the ways in
                                           which the addicted professional is different. As
                                           he cautions, he is using the term “different”
                                           conservatively and does not want it to suggest
                                           that this is an elite group. He goes on to present
                                           convincing evidence that the alcoholic’s and
                                           addict’s inclination to believe he or she is
                                           unique or special contributes not only to the
                                           disorder, but also to recovery.          
                                              Throughout, Nace does a commendable   
                                           job of integrating the theoretical and the prac-
                                           tical. In Chapter 4 he presents many useful
                                           recommendations and clearly written sug- 
                                           gestions on intervention, diagnosis, and 
                                           evaluation. He provides many nuts-and-bolts
                                           suggestions about what to do, how to do it, and
                                           when. His theoretical perspective encompasses
                                           both the disease concept and the most current
                                           positions within psychodynamic theory.   
                                              Drawing on the world of Kohut, Khantzian,
                                           and Kurtz, he admirably integrates two differ-
                                           ent theoretical perspectives, showing how the
                                           disease concept and psychodynamic theory 
                                           can complement each other. For example, he

=== Page 7 (1 cols) ===
BOOK REVIEWS                                         77              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                           JOURNAL OF PSYCHOThERAPY PRACTICE AND RESEARCH           
               illustrates how Kurtz’s writings about addic-                        
               tion and shame complement Kohut’s and                                
               Khantzian’s views on the relation of shame to                        
               narcissism. He draws parallels between                               
               Kurtz’s perspective on addiction as an attempt                       
               to combat shame and Khantzian’s self-medi-                           
               cation hypothesis, which defines addiction as                        
               an attempt at self-repair that fails.                                
                 The book does have an unacknowledged                               
               bias. Although I personally hold to and agree                        
               with most of his recommendations on treat-                           
               ment, he fails to speak to the chasm that exists                     
               between the majority of the addiction treat-                         
               ment community and the small but powerful                            
               community of researchers, educators, and                             
               treatment professionals who are strongly op-                         
               posed to 12-step abstinence-based models and                         
               disease-concept-oriented approaches. Al-                             
               though the majority of treatment personnel                           
               who work with addiction would find Nace’s                            
               perspectives and recommendations useful,                             
               helpful, and complimentary, there are grow-                          
               ing numbers of more academically and behav-                          
               iorally oriented individuals who would                               
               vehemently disagree with Nace’s position on                          
               addiction. It is not necessary that Nace address                     
               this controversy, but it would have been help-                       
               ful to at least acknowledge it.                                      
                 Despite a few oversights, the book is an                           
               excellent one by an author who obviously                             
               understands the addictive process thor-                              
               oughly. It reflects the insights of someone                          
               whose interest is not merely passing or purely                       
               academic. Dr. Nace has obviously worked                              
               extensively with this population on a personal                       
               and intimate level. This is a clearly written                        
               and concisely organized book that makes ju-                          
               dicious use of clinical examples to help illus-                      
               trate what could otherwise be dull, abstract,                        
               and ponderous reading. His cleverly pre-                             
               sented examples help his material come alive                         
               on the page. Nace’s book will be helpful to the                      
               beginning student of addiction, the seasoned                         
               practitioner who wishes to expand his or her                         
               understanding of this disorder, and the expe-                        
               rienced addiction specialist who wishes to                           
               know more about this segment of the addicted                         
               population.                                                          
                                           Dr. Flores is in private practice and is Adjunct
                                           Clinical Associate, Department of Psychology,
                                           Georgia State University, and Adjunct Clinical
                                           Supervisor, Department of Psychiatry, Emory Uni-
                                           versity, Atlanta, GA.                    
                                           Eye Movement Desensitization and         
                                           Reprocessing:Principles, Processes,      
                                           and Procedures                           
                                           By Francine Shapiro, Ph.D.               
                                           New York, Guilford Press, 1995, 398 pages,
                                           ISBN 0-89862-960-8, $42.00               
                                           Reviewed by T/wmas D. Geracioti,Jr., MD. 
                                           In                                       
                                              this book, Francine Shapiro details the
                                             clinical procedures and theoretical princi-
                                           ples of eye movement desensitization and re-
                                           processing (EMDR). Recently, EMDR has    
                                           been gaining popular acceptance as an effec-
                                           tive treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder
                                           (PTSD), among other putative indications,
                                           although awareness of the technique within
                                           academic medical centers remains dim. Pre-
                                           liminary research on the clinical efficacy of
                                           EMDR, cited by Shapiro, is highly encourag-
                                           ing, but additional well-designed studies are
                                           needed to validate its usefulness and to explore
                                           its effects. This book is timely insofar as it
                                           provides the uninitiated with a comprehensive
                                           introduction to EMDR by its creator.     
                                              Shapiro traces the origins ofEMDR to her
                                           days as a graduate student in 1987, when-
                                           while walking in the park-she noted that her
                                           own rhythmic eye movements seemed to be  
                                           associated with the immediate disappearance
                                           of some disturbing thoughts. When later re-
                                           called, these thoughts “were not as upsetting
                                           or as valid as before.” Indeed, the central
                                           procedure in EMDR involves using the fingers
                                           to lead the client in back-and-forth eye move-
                                           ments while he or she holds “targeted” prob-
                                           lematic images in consciousness. Shapiro 
                                           claims that repeated sets of directed eye
                                           movements activate the brain’s “informa- 
                                           tion-processing system” and facilitate the

=== Page 8 (1 cols) ===
78                                           BOOK REVIEWS            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                 VOLUME 6 #{149} NUMBER! #{149} WINTER 1997         
               therapeutic working-through of traumatic ex-                         
               perience. A typical “set” consists of at least 24                    
               bidirectional eye movements. Other stimuli,                          
               such as bilateral, alternating hand taps or                          
               stimulation of the acoustic apparatus, are also                      
               said to mobilize the information-processing                          
               system as well as eye movements. Although                            
               no in-depth exploration of the different neuro-                      
               nal afferents evoked by these different stimuli                      
               is attempted, consideration is given to the                          
               possibilities that either alternating hemi-                          
               spheric activation alone (in the absence of any                      
               specific movement) or the rhythmicity of                             
               movement itself is of clinical importance.                           
                 The EMDR protocol itself consists of                               
               eight “essential” phases-”cient preparation,                         
               history, and assessment,” followed by “desen-                        
               sitization, installation, body scan, closure”                        
               and, finally, “reevaluation.” Shapiro asserts                        
               that “dysfunctional material” (images and as-                        
               sociated cognitions, typically trauma-related)                       
               is “stored in its original state-specific form”                      
               and is stimulated if it is held in consciousness.                    
               Processing of this material, which had been                          
               arrested, then proceeds if the information-                          
               processing system is simultaneously activated                        
               during sets of repeated eye movements. While                         
               traumatically engendered dysfunctional mate-                         
               rial is said to be held in a “neuro network” that                    
               operates autonomously, or is effectively cut off                     
               from other networks, similar traumatic events                        
               are regarded as being linked associatively to                        
               the target memory or image. Once activated                           
               in a directed manner, the patient’s capacity for                     
               “spontaneously generated recovery” report-                           
               edly leads to a healthy physiological transfor-                      
               mation of both the nodal trauma and                                  
               associated traumas, so that thoughts of the                          
               traumas are no longer associated with pain or                        
               pathological reactions. Once this desensitiza-                       
               tion to the traumatic material and the associ-                       
               ated “negative cognition” (such as “I am a                           
               permanently damaged”) is achieved, the next                          
               step is the “installation” of an appropriate re-                     
               placement “positive cognition” (such as “I am                        
               healthy”) that was previously agreed upon                            
               between clinician and patient. This positive                         
               cognition allegedly generalizes to the entire                        
                                           associative memory network that had held the
                                           incompletely processed traumatic material.
                                           Shapiro believes that use of her method can
                                           “accelerate” information processing to such a
                                           degree that enduring symptomatic relief can
                                           often be obtained with just a few treatment
                                           sessions and, sometimes, after only a single
                                           session. She hypothesizes that the rapid, “time
                                           free” nature of EMDR-invoked accelerated 
                                           information processing might involve neuro-
                                           physiologic mechanisms similar to those that
                                           permit elaborate sequences to be dreamed in
                                           a relatively short time during REM sleep.
                                              Although use of directed eye movements
                                           is reminiscent of certain mesmerizing tech-
                                           niques, and the reported association of eye
                                           movements with cerebral activation is vaguely
                                           reminiscent of neurolinguistic processing
                                           theory, the technique of EMDR appears    
                                           novel. However, the EMDR premise that    
                                           “most psychopathologies are based on early
                                           life experiences” should resonate with psycho-
                                           analytically oriented therapists, as should Dr.
                                           Shapiro’s admonition to “stay out of the way
                                           of the client during successful processing.”
                                           Although Shapiro repeatedly prescribes for-
                                           mal training in EMDR prior to attempting its
                                           use, study of this book by experienced, well-
                                           trained psychotherapists should permit safe
                                           experimentation with many of its methods.
                                              The book is not without flaws. It is loosely
                                           constructed and long; elimination of frequent
                                           repetitions alone could reduce its 400 pages
                                           without any loss of information. The focus is
                                           clinical, and properly so, but treatment of
                                           associative memory, neurocircuitry, and neu-
                                           ral network architectures is simplistic. But in the
                                           final analysis, if EMDR does pan out to be
                                           generally efficacious in the treatment of PTSD,
                                           then it constitutes a major contribution to our
                                           clinical armamentarium. This book is highly
                                           recommended for anyone interested in learn-
                                           ing about or practicing the technique of EMDR
                                           Dr. Geracioti is Chief Psychiatry Service, Veterans
                                           Affairs Medical Center, Cincinnati and Associate
                                           Professor of Psychiatry University of Cincinnati
                                           Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH

=== Page 9 (1 cols) ===
BOOK REVIEWS                                         79              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                            JOURNAL OF PSYCHOTHERAPY PRACTICE AND RESEARCH          
                       Software Review                                              
               TheraScribe for Windows                                              
               By Arthur E.Jongsma,Jr., L Mark Peterson,                            
               and KennethJongsma                                                   
               New York,John Wiley and Sons, 1996, $345.00                          
               Reviewed by David Bienenfeld, MD.                                    
               T                                                                    
                  heraScribe will help you “spend time on                           
                  patients, not paperwork,” boasts the box                          
               of this “computerized assistant to psychother-                       
               apy treatment planning.” The authors have                            
               attempted to create a program that allows                            
               clinicians to generate legible, organized treat-                     
               ment plans, saving the clinician’s valuable                          
               time. It also serves as a “consultant,” providing                    
               suggestions for diagnosis, goals, objectives,                        
               and interventions.                                                   
                 The program is organized in a sensible                             
               fashion that is applicable to most clinical set-                     
               tings. The “Next” button at the bottom of most                       
               screens generally takes the user to where he                         
               or she is likely to want to be. A flow chart in                      
               the User’s Guide maps the logical terrain.                           
               The user first identifies himself or herself by                      
               name and password and is then taken to the                           
               opening screen. When adding a new patient,                           
               one is prompted for demographic and insur-                           
               ance data, as well as assessments completed                          
               (e.g., Beck Depression Inventory, Luria-Nebraska                     
               Battery).                                                            
                 The next section, the largest, details the                         
               presenting problems. These problems must be                          
               selected from a generous list, to which the user                     
               may add his or her own choices. Nested within                        
               the Presenting Problems display are further                          
               displays regarding behavioral definitions of                         
               the problems, long-term goals, short-term ob-                        
               jectives, therapeutic interventions, and prog-                       
               ress notes. Like the presenting problems, these                      
               must be chosen from a library, which the user                        
               may edit. He or she is then returned to the                          
               main logical stream to select treatment modali-                      
               ties (such as group therapy) and treatment                           
               approaches (such as cognitive restructuring).                        
                                           Then the clinician completes a mental status
                                           screen, using libraries and free text. Next, the
                                           program provides a differential of DSM-IV
                                           diagnoses matching the primary problem; the
                                           user may select or edit. Final screens elicit
                                           information about prognosis, discharge crite-
                                           ria, and provider credentials.           
                                              The libraries of problem definitions, goals
                                           and objectives, and interventions are quite
                                           large and generally relevant. The choices that
                                           ship with the program seem weighted toward
                                           behavioral and popular-psychological phi-
                                           losophies. For example, the objectives for de-
                                           pression include numerous items such as  
                                           “Identify cognitive self-talk that is engaged to
                                           support depression.” Therapeutic interven-
                                           tions include writing letters to lost loved ones
                                           and reading Hazelden self-help books. Psy-
                                           chodynamic objectives and interventions  
                                           seem stuck in notions such as “anger directed
                                           inward.” These libraries are, however, easily
                                           modified by each user. The printed report, as
                                           advertised, is quite attractive; it is sensibly
                                           arranged and easily tailored. It is easy to assess
                                           one’s status in completing the report with just
                                           two clicks of the mouse.                 
                                              There are some annoying aspects to the
                                           strategy of the program: inexplicably, the pro-
                                           gram automatically loads the record of the
                                           (alphabetical) first patient. Thus, the record of
                                           Anna Abel is always loaded at boot-up. Two
                                           providers may access one patient’s record, but
                                           only if one is identified to the program as the
                                           “supervising provider.” In a setting where a
                                           physician is prescribing medications and a
                                           counselor is providing therapy under the su-
                                           pervision of a third person, someone is denied
                                           access to the record. Nesting progress notes
                                           within the Presenting Problems display is
                                           counterintuitive and forces the user to descend
                                           through several layers to record a progress
                                           note. The Progress screen, too, is less helpfully
                                           organized than most of the others.       
                                              The program itself requires a healthy 
                                           amount of hardware. Operating with less  
                                           than a Pentium processor, 12MB of RAM, and
                                           Windows 95 yields unacceptably slow per- 
                                           formance in supporting the handsome (but

=== Page 10 (1 cols) ===
80                                                                   
                                                            BOOK REVIEWS            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                 VOLUME 6 #{149} NUMBER! #{149} WINTER 1997         
               unnecessary) graphics. Installation is simple,                       
               and the User’s Guide is clearly written.                             
                 The biggest question left in the mind of                           
               this reviewer is, “Why bother?” Managed care                         
               organizations will insist that treatment plans                       
               be completed on their own proprietary forms.                         
               Individual clinicians will derive no benefit                         
               from this program. The only setting in which                         
               TheraScribe might have use is in a multi-                            
               provider group, where standardization of re-                         
               cords is desirable for internal purposes. (Here,                     
               however, the inability of more than one pri-                         
               mary provider to access records requires the                         
               generation of hard copy.) Since the progress                         
               notes are so clumsy, it seems that the one                           
               purpose of the program is to generate a hard-                        
                                           copy treatment plan. After some hours spent
                                           becoming familiar with the program, this 
                                           computer-literate user found that it took con-
                                           siderably longer to complete a treatment plan
                                           with TheraScribe than it would have taken to
                                           fill in a comparable form by hand. Even iden-
                                           tifying only one presenting problem, one must
                                           navigate through at least 35 displays to com-
                                           plete the assessment. Like many works of soft-
                                           ware, TheraScribe seems like a clever idea in
                                           search of a purpose.                     
                                           Dr. Bienenfeld is Associate Professor and Vice
                                           L(cid:1)hainnan, Department of Psychiatry, Wright State
                                           (cid:1)o#{252}egeofMedicine, Dayton, OH

