=== Page 1 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 2 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 3 (1 cols) ===
Counseling                                            
                                                and                  
                                                                     
                                                                     
               Psychotherapy                                         
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
               with                                                  
                      Children                                       
                                                    and              
               Adolescents

=== Page 4 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 5 (1 cols) ===
H.  Thompson       Prout   &  Alicia  L. Fedewa            
          Counseling                                                 
                                                    and              
          Psychotherapy                                              
          with                                                       
                   Children                                          
                                                        and          
          Adolescents                                                
                       Theory   and  Practice  for                   
              School      and    Clinical     Settings

=== Page 6 (1 cols) ===
Coverdesign:LaurynTom/Wiley                                    
      Coverimage:©iStockphoto|timsa                                  
                                                                     
      Thisbookisprintedonacid-freepaper.                             
      Copyright©2015byJohnWiley&Sons,Inc. Allrightsreserved.         
                                                                     
      PublishedbyJohnWiley& Sons,Inc.,Hoboken,NewJersey.             
      PublishedsimultaneouslyinCanada.                               
      Nopartofthispublicationmaybereproduced,storedinaretrievalsystem,ortransmittedinanyformorbyanymeans,
      electronic, mechanical, photocopying,recording,scanning, orotherwise,exceptaspermittedunderSection 107or108
      ofthe1976UnitedStatesCopyrightAct,withouteitherthepriorwrittenpermissionofthePublisher, orauthorization
      throughpaymentoftheappropriateper-copyfeetotheCopyright Clearance Center, Inc.,222RosewoodDrive,
      Danvers, MA01923,(978)750–8400,fax(978)646–8600,oronthewebatwww.copyright.com.Requeststothe
      PublisherforpermissionshouldbeaddressedtothePermissionsDepartment,JohnWiley&Sons,Inc., 111River
      Street, Hoboken,NJ07030,(201)748-6011,fax(201)748-6008.        
      LimitofLiability/Disclaimer ofWarranty:Whilethepublisherandauthorhaveusedtheirbesteffortsinpreparingthis
      book,theymakenorepresentationsorwarrantieswithrespecttotheaccuracyorcompletenessofthecontentsofthis
      bookandspecificallydisclaimanyimpliedwarrantiesofmerchantability orfitnessforaparticularpurpose.Nowarranty
      maybecreatedorextendedbysalesrepresentativesorwrittensalesmaterials. Theadviceandstrategiescontained
      herein maynotbesuitableforyoursituation.Youshouldconsultwithaprofessionalwhereappropriate.Neither the
      publishernorauthorshallbeliableforanylossofprofitoranyothercommercialdamages,including butnotlimitedto
      special, incidental, consequential, orotherdamages.            
      Thispublicationisdesignedtoprovideaccurateandauthoritativeinformation inregardtothesubjectmattercovered.
      Itissoldwiththeunderstanding thatthepublisherisnotengagedinrendering professionalservices.Iflegal,
      accounting, medical, psychologicalorany otherexpertassistance isrequired,theservicesofacompetentprofessional
      personshouldbesought.                                          
      Designations usedbycompaniestodistinguishtheirproductsareoftenclaimedastrademarks.Inallinstances where
      JohnWiley&Sons,Inc. isawareofaclaim,theproductnamesappearininitialcapitalorallcapitalletters.Readers,
      however,shouldcontacttheappropriatecompaniesformorecompleteinformation regardingtrademarksand
      registration.                                                  
      Forgeneral informationonourotherproductsandservicespleasecontactourCustomerCareDepartment withinthe
      UnitedStatesat(800)762-2974,outsidetheUnitedStatesat(317)572-3993orfax(317)572-4002.
      Wileypublishesinavarietyofprintandelectronicformatsandbyprint-on-demand. Somematerialincludedwith
      standardprintversionsofthisbookmaynotbeincludedine-booksorinprint-on-demand.Ifthisbookreferstomedia
      suchasaCDorDVD thatisnotincludedintheversionyoupurchased,youmaydownloadthismaterialat
      http://booksupport.wiley.com.FormoreinformationaboutWileyproducts,visitwww.wiley.com.
      Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:            
      Counseling andpsychotherapywithchildren andadolescents:theoryandpracticeforschoolandclinical settings/
      [editedby]H.ThompsonProut,AliciaL.Fedewa.–5thed.               
         1online resource.                                           
        Includesbibliographicalreferences andindex.                  
        DescriptionbasedonprintversionrecordandCIPdataprovidedbypublisher;resourcenotviewed.
        ISBN978-1-118-77268-3(pbk)–ISBN978-1-118-77270-6(pdf)–ISBN978-1-118-77269-0(epub)
        I.Prout,H.Thompson,1947-,editor.II.Fedewa,Alicia L.,editor.  
        [DNLM: 1.Psychotherapy. 2.Adolescent. 3.Child. 4.Counseling. WS350.2]
        RJ504                                                        
        618.92’8914—dc23                                             
                                                    2014037418       
      PrintedintheUnitedStatesofAmerica                              
      10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

=== Page 7 (1 cols) ===
Contents                               
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Preface                                             vii    
                                                                     
          About the Editors                                   ix     
                                                                     
          Contributors                                        xi     
                                                                     
             1 Counseling and Psychotherapy with Children and Adolescents: Historical,
               Developmental, Integrative, and Effectiveness Perspectives 1
             H. Thompson Prout and Alicia L. Fedewa                  
                                                                     
                                                                     
             2 Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions with Children
               and Adolescents 25                                    
             Alicia L. Fedewa, Susan M. Prout, and H. Thompson Prout 
                                                                     
             3 Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy with Children
               and Adolescents 61                                    
             Janine Jones                                            
                                                                     
             4 Play Therapy: A Child-Centered Approach 91            
                                                                     
             Sue Bratton, Katherine Purswell, and Kimberly Jayne     
                                                                     
             5 Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 115    
             Rich Gilman and Kathleen Chard                          
                                                                     
             6 Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 155                 
                                                                     
             Raymond DiGiuseppe and Oana Alexandra David             
                                                                     
             7 Reality Therapy Approaches 217                        
             Gerald B. Fuller                                        
                                                                     
             8 Solution-Focused Approaches 279                       
             John J. Murphy                                          
                                                                     
                                    v

=== Page 8 (1 cols) ===
vi   C                                                         
            ONTENTS                                                  
          9 Systemic Approaches: Family Therapy 317                  
          William B. Gunn Jr., Joni Haley, Anne M. Prouty, and Janet Robertson
                                                                     
                                                                     
         10 Children and Adolescents with Disabilities: Implications 
           for Interventions 357                                     
          Jonathan M. Campbell, Lisa A. Ruble, and Rachel K. Hammond 
                                                                     
          Author Index 399                                           
          Subject Index 407

=== Page 9 (1 cols) ===
Preface                               
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
          T  his is now the fifth edition of this volume. As noted in the Preface of the fourth
             edition, the impetus of the first edition was really based on a lack of books and
          resources on child/adolescent counseling and psychotherapy. My—how things have
          changed! In our preparation for this volume, we did a number of things. First, we
          reviewed the four earlier volumes and looked at the “trajectory” of how the field has
                                                                     
          grown and expanded. This was an interesting examination—the area now has multiple
          intervention and treatment options and a much stronger empirical base. Second, we
          looked at trends in the field—where children and adolescents were being treated, what
          are the issues and problems facing today’s youth, and what are the range of treatment
          options. Importantly, what are the most contemporary approaches?
            Our goal for this volume remains much the same as the first volume—to provide a
                                                                     
          comprehensive overview of major approaches for helping children and youth experienc-
          ing social-emotional difficulties. We also feel it is important to understand the context of
          child/adolescent treatment. Ethical and legal concerns, diversity issues, and issues relat-
          ing to disabilities potentially all have impact regardless of theoretical approach. In the
          first volume, we used the term intelligent eclecticism. We obviously believe in the impor-
          tance of theory as being the base of our interventions but we also encourage professionals
          not be bound to a single theory. Our belief is that professionals can utilize a range of
                                                                     
          perspectives and blend approaches depending on the circumstances, and thoughtfully
          (i.e., intelligent eclecticism) develop comprehensive approaches to working with chil-
          dren and youth. It is also clear that counseling and therapy with youth does not occur
          in a vacuum—comprehensive interventions that include counseling and therapy also
          should consider the various systems that impact children. In addition to direct work with
          a child, successful interventions often include teachers, parents, other family members,
          and community social supports.                             
                                                                     
            We made a number of changes in this volume. We added chapters on solution-focused
          approaches and a chapter on play therapy. We also eliminated some chapters in order to
          be able to present what we judged as the most contemporary perspectives. This volume
          also includes several new chapter authors who are leaders in their respective fields.
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                    vii

=== Page 10 (1 cols) ===
viii P                                                         
            REFACE                                                   
      All chapters are thoroughly updated to reflect the most current literature and
      evidence-based therapy in child psychotherapy.                 
                                                                     
        In a volume of this nature, we offer sincere thanks to our chapter authors. We thank
      these colleagues who reviewed the book and provided valuable feedback: Callen
      Fishman, PsyD, assistant professor, Division of Counseling and School Psychology,
      Alfred University; Cindy Plotts, PhD, professor, School Psychology Program, Texas
      State University at San Marcos; Mendy Mays, EdD, assistant professor, Department of
      School of Professional Counseling, Lindsey Wilson College; Maxine L. Rawlins, PhD,
      professor, Department of Counselor Education, Bridgewater State University; Melissa
                                                                     
      Laracuenta, PsyD, clinical associate professor, Fordham University. We also thank
      Wiley for its support and encouragement on this project. Rachel Livsey and Melinda
      Noack have been extremely helpful as the project has progressed.
        Instructor’s supplements are available at www.wiley.com/go/prout. The supplements
      include instructor’s manuals, test banks, and PowerPoint slides.
                                                H. Thompson Prout    
                                                  Alicia L. Fedewa

=== Page 11 (1 cols) ===
About      the  Editors                       
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
          H. Thompson Prout, PhD, is a professor in the Educational, School, and Counseling
          Psychology Department at the University of Kentucky. He is the author of more than
          80 books, chapters, and articles and has presented at numerous international and
          national conferences. His interests are in the area of psychotherapy outcomes, mental
          health issues with children and adolescents, and social-emotional problems in persons
                                                                     
          with disabilities.                                         
                                                                     
          Alicia L. Fedewa, PhD, NCSP, is an associate professor in the Educational, School, and
          Counseling Psychology Department at the University of Kentucky. She has presented
          nationally and internationally and is the author of more than 30 peer-reviewed articles
          and book chapters. She is a licensed psychologist, nationally certified school psycholo-
          gist, and is an active clinical supervisor. Her research interests include effects of physical
          activity on children’s mental health, behavioral and academic outcomes, and the risk
                                                                     
          and protective factors of children who are raised in same-sex parented families.
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                    ix

=== Page 12 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 13 (1 cols) ===
Contributors                              
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Sue Bratton, PhD                                           
          University of North Texas                                  
                                                                     
          Denton, Texas                                              
                                                                     
          Jonathan Campbell, PhD                                     
          Department of Educational, School,                         
            and Counseling Psychology                                
          University of Kentucky                                     
          Lexington, Kentucky                                        
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Kathleen Chard, PhD                                        
          Department of Psychiatry and                               
            Behavioral Neuroscience                                  
          University of Cincinnati                                   
          Cincinnati, Ohio                                           
                                                                     
          Oana Alexandra David, PhD                                  
                                                                     
          Department of Clinical Psychology                          
            and Psychotherapy                                        
          Babes-Bolyai University                                    
          Cluj-Napoca, Romania                                       
                                                                     
          Raymond DiGiuseppe, PhD                                    
          St. John’s University                                      
                                                                     
          Queens, New York                                           
                                      Gerard B. Fuller, PhD          
                                      Walden University              
                                      Minneapolis, Minnesota         
                                      Rich Gilman, PhD               
                                      University of Cincinnati Medical School
                                      Cincinnati, Ohio               
                                      William B. Gunn Jr., PhD       
                                      Dartmouth Medical School       
                                      Hanover, New Hampshire         
                                      Joni Haley, PhD                
                                      Concord Hospital Family Health 
                                       Center/NH Dartmouth Family    
                                       Medicine Residency            
                                      Concord, New Hampshire         
                                      Rachel Hammond, PhD            
                                      University of Kentucky         
                                      Lexington, Kentucky            
                                      Janine Jones, PhD              
                                      University of Washington       
                                      Seattle, Washington            
                                    xi

=== Page 14 (1 cols) ===
xii  C                                                         
            ONTRIBUTORS                                              
      John J. Murphy, PhD                                            
      Department of Psychology and                                   
                                                                     
        Counseling                                                   
      University of Central Arkansas                                 
      Conway, Arkansas                                               
                                                                     
      Susan M. Prout, EdS                                            
      Fayette County Schools                                         
      Lexington, Kentucky                                            
                                                                     
                                                                     
      Anne Prouty, PhD                                               
      Texas Tech University                                          
      Lubbock, Texas                                                 
                                  Janet Robertson                    
                                  Doctoral Candidate                 
                                  Department of Applied Psychology   
                                  Antioch University New England     
                                  Keene, New Hampshire               
                                  Lisa A. Ruble, PhD                 
                                  University of Kentucky             
                                  Lexington, Kentucky

=== Page 15 (1 cols) ===
CHAPTER                             
                                   1                                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
              Counseling       and    Psychotherapy                  
                                                                     
              with   Children      and   Adolescents                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                  Historical, Developmental, Integrative,            
                       and Effectiveness Perspectives                
                                                                     
                                                                     
                      H. T                                           
                         HOMPSON                                     
                               P                                     
                                ROUT AND                             
                                       A                             
                                         LICIA                       
                                            L. F                     
                                               EDEWA                 
          T  he psychological treatment of children’s problems is the focus of several professions
             and is carried out in many settings and situations. Although theoretical viewpoints
          are wide-ranging and essentially rooted in adult-based theories, the child or adolescent
          presents a unique challenge to the child mental health worker. Children are not sim-
          ply little adults. Their treatment cannot be viewed as scaled-down adult therapy; their
          developmental stages, environments, reasons for entering therapy, and other relevant
          factors necessitate a different, if not creative, approach to therapy. The child/adolescent
          therapist must have an expanded knowledge base of the human condition and a different
          perspective of what constitutes therapy or counseling.     
            This book is about psychotherapy and mental health counseling with children and
          adolescents. It brings together in a comparative format the major theoretical views of
          psychological treatment of children and highlights major issues in the area. A number
          of concerns, however, cut across the theories and are relevant to any provision of mental
          health services to children. This introductory chapter describessome of these issues: His-
          torical perspectives, the mental health needs of children and adolescents and the need
          for services, developmental issues, the unique aspects of child and adolescent therapy,
          a multimodal research/efficacy issues and evidence-based approaches. Throughout this
          chapter, the terms counseling and psychotherapy are used interchangeably.
                                                                     
                                    1

=== Page 16 (1 cols) ===
2   C                                                          
           OUNSELING AND                                             
                   P                                                 
                    SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                                
                              C                                      
                               HILDREN AND                           
                                      A                              
                                       DOLESCENTS                    
      HISTORICAL  PERSPECTIVES ON THE MENTAL HEALTH  NEEDS           
      OF CHILDREN  AND ADOLESCENTS                                   
      Many major advances in clinical mental health work can, in some way, be traced to
      Freud. Mental health work with children is no exception. Freud’s classic case study of
      “Little Hans” in 1909 is generally viewed as the first reported attempt to psychologically
      explain and treat a childhood disorder (S. Freud, 1955). Although Freud did not directly
      treat Little Hans’s phobia, he offered a psychoanalytic explanation of the problems and
      guided the father in the treatment of Hans. This case study is recognized as providing
      the base for Freud’s theories on the stages of psychosexual development. Freud’s inter-
      est in childhood disorders apparently waned at this point, and it was not until 1926
      that his daughter, Anna, presented a series of lectures entitled “Introduction to the
      Technique of Psycho-analysis of Children” to the Vienna Institute of Psychoanalysis.
      These lectures generated considerable interest and established Anna Freud as a pio-
      neer in child psychotherapy. Shortly thereafter, Melanie Klein (1932), emphasizing the
      symbolic importance of children’s play, introduced free play with children as a substi-
      tute for the free association technique used with adults, thus inventing play therapy.
      Although these two camps disagreed on many issues, they have remained the dominant
      voicesinthechildpsychoanalyticfield,withmostanalyticworkbeingaspin-offofeither
      A. Freud or Klein.                                             
        At approximately the same time (the early 20th century), other forces were beginning
      to put more emphasis on work with children. In France in 1905, Alfred Binet completed
      initial work on his intelligence test, which was used for making educational placement
      decisions in the Paris schools. This work provided the base for the psychometric study of
      individuals and had great impact on child study and applied psychology. At the Univer-
      sity of Pennsylvania in the United States, Witmer had established a clinic for children
      in 1896 that focused on school adjustment and in 1909 Healy founded what is now
      the Institute for Juvenile Research in Chicago. These events provided the base for the
      child guidance movement, emphasizing a multidisciplinary team approach to the diag-
      nosis and treatment of children’s adjustment and psychological difficulties. The child
      guidance model involved treating both the children and their parents. The increased
      interest in clinical and research work on children’s problems led to the founding of the
      American Orthopsychiatric Association in 1924, an organization of psychologists, social
      workers, and psychiatrists concerned with the mental health problems of children.
        Through the 1940s and into the 1950s, psychoanalytic psychotherapies were used
      almost exclusively in the treatment of children. In 1947, Virginia Axline published
                                                                     
      Play Therapy, describing a nondirective mode of treatment utilizing play. Nondirective
      play therapy was, in effect, a child version of Carl Rogers’s adult-oriented client-centered
      therapy. Both nondirective play therapy and client-centered therapy represented the
      first major departures from psychoanalytic thought, differing in conceptualization of the

=== Page 17 (1 cols) ===
Counseling and Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 3
                                                                     
          therapeutic process and content in the role of the therapist. Rogers’s impact on adult psy-
          chotherapy was paralleled and followed by Axline’s impact on child therapy. The next
                                                                     
          major movement in psychotherapy was the rise of the behaviorally based approaches
          to treatment. Although the principles and potential applications of behavioral psy-
          chology were long known, it was not until the 1960s that behavior modification and
          therapy began to be used frequently in clinical work with children. In recent years,
          cognitive-behavioral approaches have become prominent as a treatment modality.
            The mental health treatment of children and adolescents has also been affected by
          two policy and legislative mandates. First, the community mental health movement was
                                                                     
          strongly influenced by the passage in 1963 of the federal program to construct mental
          health centers in local communities and begin a move away from large institutional
          treatment. This movement grew not only because it was mandated by a federal pro-
          gram but because it represented a philosophy that mental health interventions are more
          likely to be successful when carried out in the community where the maladjustment is
          occurring. The new programs emphasized early intervention and prevention of mental
          disorders. The second mandate, with a similar philosophical base, involved the provi-
                                                                     
          sion of special education services to all handicapped children, including emotionally
          disturbed and behavior-disordered children and adolescents. Exemplified initially by
          Public Law 94–142 (now the Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act
          [IDEA]), this movement has not only expanded the role of public education in provi-
          sion of services to these children but also allowed more children to remain in their home
          communities. Psychotherapy and mental health treatment, if deemed a part of the total
                                                                     
          educational program of a child, has become by law and policy an educational service.
            In the past 10 to 15 years, child and adolescent treatment has been in the identifica-
          tion of treatments that are evidence based (e.g., Kazdin, 2003; Weisz & Kazdin, 2010).
          Various terms have been used to describe these treatments including empirically validated
          or supported treatments, evidence-based practice, or simply treatments that work. Efforts have
          also been made to quantify the degree and strength of support for the treatments, for
          example, the number of studies showing evidence of effectiveness. Studies are examined
                                                                     
          with the specification of treatment (i.e., age, setting, presenting problem), use of treat-
          ment manuals or clearly specified intervention procedures, and evaluation of outcome
          withmultiplemeasures.Proceduresmustbereplicableandindependentreplicationstud-
          ies are often included in criteria for a treatment to be labeled as evidence based.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          CHILD AND ADOLESCENT  MENTAL  HEALTH                       
          NEEDS: A CHRONIC PROBLEM                                   
                                                                     
          There are well-documented estimates of large and perhaps increasing numbers of chil-
          dren who are experiencing significant mental health problems. These needs have been
          apparent for some time. Studies in the 1960s and 1970s clearly showed the pervasiveness

=== Page 18 (1 cols) ===
4   C                                                          
           OUNSELING AND                                             
                   P                                                 
                    SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                                
                              C                                      
                               HILDREN AND                           
                                      A                              
                                       DOLESCENTS                    
      of problems at that time. In a study of children in public school, Bower (1969) estimated
      that at least three students in a typical classroom (i.e., 10% of school-age children and
      adolescents) suffered from moderate to severe mental health problems; many of these
      children were disturbed enough to warrant special educational services for the emotion-
      ally handicapped. In 1968, Nuffield, citing an estimate of 2.5 to 4.5 million children
      under the age of 14 in need of psychiatric treatment, found indices of only 300,000
      receiving treatment services. This figure represented services to roughly 10% of those
      in need. Berlin estimated in 1975 that each year there would be 6 million school-age
      children with emotional problems serious enough to indicate the need for professional
      intervention. Cowen (1973) noted a smaller group (1.5 million) in need of immediate
      help but estimated that fewer than 30% of these children were receiving this help.
        Therehasbeenlittlechangeinthereductionofproblems.KazdinandJohnson(1994)
      noted that incidence studies show between 17% and 22% of youth under the age of 18
      have some type of emotional, behavioral, or developmental problem. This represented
      between 11 and 14 million of the 64 million youth in the United States with significant
      impairment. They noted that many of those with disorders are not referred for treatment
      and are not the focus of treatment in the schools. Kazdin and Johnson (1994) also noted
      that there are high and increasing rates of at-risk behaviors, including antisocial and
      delinquent behaviors, and substance abuse. Doll (1996), in a synthesis of epidemiology
      studies, notes a similar rate of 18% to 22% with diagnosable disorders, translating this to
      the analogy of a school of 1,000 students with 180 to 220 students in the school having
      a disorder in the clinical ranges. Doll sees the need for broad-based policies at all levels
      (i.e., school, district, governmental) to address these significant needs. Regardless of the
      estimate of incidence, it is clear that many children and adolescents with problems are
      not identified by educational, mental health, and social service institutions as having
      emotional difficulties and thus are not referred for or provided treatment services.
        Reviews (Huang et al., 2005; Tolan & Dodge, 2005) have noted this continued prob-
      lem despite many government panels formed to address the problem. It is estimated that
      1 in 5 children have a diagnosable disorder, with 1 in 10 having a disorder that sub-
      stantially impacts functioning at home, at school, or in the community. Further, there
      continues to be limited or difficult access to appropriate mental health services, both for
      families with financial resources and those with more limited means.
        Children and adolescents remain critically underserved populations, despite ample
      recognition of the problem based on nearly 40 years of research documenting needs. The
      mental health needs of children present an enormous service delivery shortfall; and with
      funding problems continuing in the human services, the gap between need and available
      services is likely to continue. Preventive services may be a cost- and resource-efficient
      mode for dealing with part of this problem, but the provision of quality counseling
      and psychotherapeutic services will be a crucial component in the total mental health

=== Page 19 (1 cols) ===
Counseling and Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 5
                                                                     
          system. Tolan and Dodge (2005) call for a fundamental policy shift to development of a
          comprehensive mental health care system for children that includes treatment, support,
                                                                     
          and prevention.                                            
            Huang et al. (2005) have described a “vision for children’s mental health” that would
          address the complex needs of children and adolescents, including:
                                                                     
            • Development of comprehensive home- and community-based services and sup-
              ports.                                                 
            • Development of family support and partnerships.        
            • Development of culturally competent care and reducing disparities in access
                                                                     
              to care.                                               
            • Individualization of care.                             
            • Implementation of evidence-based practice.             
            • Service coordination and designation responsibility.   
            • Prevention activities for at-risk groups with earlier identification and interven-
              tion, including programs for early childhood.          
                                                                     
            • Expansion of mental health services in the schools.    
            • The components of this vision are clearly consistent with the theme of this book.
                                                                     
            The Centers for Disease Control (2013) released an updated survey of the status of
          children’s mental health. Among the highlights of this report include the increasing rate
          for internalizing disorders (e.g., depression, anxiety), behavioral disturbance (ADHD,
          conduct), and autism spectrum disorders. The report noted that up to 1 in 5 children in
          theUnitedStatesmayexperienceamentalhealthdisorderinanygivenyear.Adolescent
                                                                     
          issues included substance use/abuse disorders and suicide. Labeling children’s mental
          health as an important public health issue, the report called for increased understand-
          ing of the mental health needs of children, research on risk factors and prevention,
          and continued research on effectiveness of treatment and prevention efforts. Sadly, this
          report seems to echo studies from many years ago and points to even more needs in the
          child/adolescent population.                               
                                                                     
                                                                     
          DEVELOPMENTAL  ISSUES                                      
                                                                     
          The child/adolescent mental health professional must be familiar with human develop-
          ment for a number of reasons. With the exception of severe psychopathology or extreme
                                                                     
          behaviors, much of what is presented as problematic in children may simply be nor-
          mal developmental deviation. What is considered pathological behavior in adults may
          not be abnormal in children or adolescents. Knowledge of development and the nor-
          mal behavioral ranges at different ages is crucial to discriminating between truly deviant

=== Page 20 (1 cols) ===
6   C                                                          
           OUNSELING AND                                             
                   P                                                 
                    SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                                
                              C                                      
                               HILDREN AND                           
                                      A                              
                                       DOLESCENTS                    
      behaviorandminordevelopmentalcrises.Developmentinchildrenandadolescentsmay
      follow sequences with expected orders for the appearance of certain behaviors and char-
      acteristics yet still tend to be highly variable. Children’s personalities are quite unstable
      when compared with expectations of stability in adults. Related to this instability is the
      evidence that indicates normal development is often marked by a number of behav-
      ior problems. The child/adolescent therapist must be able to sort out these “normal”
      problems from those that may represent more serious disorders. 
        Awareness of development will also aid the therapist in clinical decision making at
      various points in the treatment process. Appropriate goal setting is important to any
      therapeutic venture. It provides a direction for our work, allows us to monitor progress,
      and tells us when we are done. The child/adolescent therapist sets these goals in a
      developmental framework and does not expect an average 8-year-old to acquire, in the
      course of therapy, the problem-solving cognitive abilities or the moral judgment of a
      10-year-old. To set goals above developmental expectations is almost ensuring that the
      interventionwillfail.Thisknowledgeofdevelopmentalsoallowsthetherapistto choose
      appropriate content and to decide what level of therapeutic interaction is best suited
      for the child. Within these developmental age expectations, the therapist must also be
      sensitive to developmental delays in children. Delays, particularly in cognition and lan-
      guage, dictate goal setting, yet they must be distinguished from behavioral or emotional
      disorders. These delays may also be major contributing factors in the development of dis-
      orders. On the other end of the spectrum, we need to be cautious not to set limited goals
      for developmentally advanced children. Although we are not advocating psychological
      assessment as a prerequisite for treatment, in most cases, the child/adolescent therapist
      will need to assess developmental levels of their clients early in the intervention.
        An understanding of child and adolescent development appears critical for effective
      therapeutic interventions. The first involves an understanding of the developmental
      stage theorists, with the works of Freud, Piaget, Kohlberg, and Erikson being the most
      notable. It is beyond the scope of this book to detail this large knowledge and research
      base on human development, but comprehensive human development text should be
      on the shelf of every therapist.                               
        As an example, we have personally found that Piaget’s theory of cognitive devel-
      opment provides an excellent base assessing intellectual development and planning
      interventions accordingly. Piaget suggested that maturation, physical experience, social
      interaction, and equilibration (the internal self-regulating system) all combine to influ-
      ence cognitive development. At different periods, the type of information that can be
      processed and the cognitive operations that can be performed vary. Cognitive develop-
      ment isa coherentand fixed sequencewith certaincognitiveabilitiesexpected at certain
      ages (e.g., see Wadsworth, 2003). Piaget allows us to select developmentally appropriate
      modes of interacting with the child and to set appropriate goals for cognitive change.

=== Page 21 (1 cols) ===
Counseling and Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 7
                                                                     
          For example, children in the concrete operations stage solve problems involving real or
          observable objects or events. They have difficulty with problems that are hypothetical
                                                                     
          and entirely verbal, making verbally oriented or more abstract counseling interven-
          tions inappropriate at this developmental stage, while children in formal operations can
          engage in broader and more abstract and generalizable problem solving.
            Probably no single developmental period provides more confusion and consternation
          forparents,teachers,andcliniciansthanadolescence.Itischaracterizedmorebyadevel-
          opmental phase than by a set, sequenced series of stages. Mercurial behaviors, many of
          them disturbing, seem to “possess” the adolescent.         
                                                                     
            Both Steinberg and Morris (2001) and Smetana, Campione-Barr, and Metzger
          (2006) view adolescence in context beyond the typical developmental theories with
          an emphasis on interpersonal and societal contexts. Issues of parent-adolescent rela-
          tionships, broader family relationship (e.g., siblings, extended family), peers, romantic
          relationships, and connection with community and school all impact the individual
          adolescent. Dolgin (2010) notes that today’s adolescent is dealing with a wide range of
          issues. Social media and cell phones have become prominent as well as diversity issues.
                                                                     
          Adolescence is marked by biological and cognitive changes and a range of identity
          issues—education, sexual identity, educational aspirations, ethnic identity, and gender
          issues. Dolgin (2010) also notes that there really is no typical family constellation that
          is common to adolescents. The adolescent is faced with many developmental issues and
          now with a different set of cognitive skills to process and analyze these changes. The
          lability often seen in adolescents is likely the norm.     
                                                                     
            The child/adolescent therapist will find much in theory and research in child and
          adolescent development that pertains to psychological interventions with these groups.
          It is difficult to imagine developing and carrying out treatment plans without a firm
          grounding in these areas. Developmental theory and broader contextual perspectives
          provide us with a framework to systematically, if not scientifically, work with children
          and adolescents and more objectively gauge our therapeutic progress with them.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          UNIQUE ASPECTS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY  WITH  CHILDREN            
          AND ADOLESCENTS                                            
                                                                     
          In addition to the developmental issues previously discussed, a number of other issues
          related to the child’s development and situation have an impact on the psychotherapeu-
          tic relationship. These factors relate to the direct work with the child or adolescent and
                                                                     
          stem from some of the differences between child/adolescent psychotherapy and adult
          psychotherapy.                                             
            Children and adolescents bring a different motivation for treatment into the coun-
          seling situation. Whereas the adult is usually aware that a personal problem exists, the

=== Page 22 (1 cols) ===
8   C                                                          
           OUNSELING AND                                             
                   P                                                 
                    SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                                
                              C                                      
                               HILDREN AND                           
                                      A                              
                                       DOLESCENTS                    
      child may not agree or recognize that there are problems or concerns. Although others
      may encourage adults to seek professional help, in most cases they will decide whether
      to enter treatment. The child is unlikely to voluntarily initiate entering into therapy.
      This decision is usually made by an adult in the child’s environment, with some varying
      degree of acceptance/compliance/resistance from the child. The involuntary nature of
      the child/adolescent client in many cases may yield little or no motivation on the part
      of the client to engage in a relationship with the therapist or not even an admission
      that any change is necessary. Thus, the first step in many interventions may be simply
      to establish some type of relationship with the child and to come to some agreement
      that change is necessary. Without developing some motivation in the client to at least
      examine the current situation, even if done nonjudgmentally, it will be difficult to make
      significant progress.                                          
        Anaspectrelatedtomotivationisthechild/adolescent’slackofunderstandingofboth
      the therapeutic process and the treatment objectives. The adult is likely to recognize the
      need to “get something out of therapy” and to have certain expectations of what is sup-
      posed to happen in the counseling situation. The adult usually will be able to verbalize
      some expectations and goals and to engage in some role-appropriate “client behaviors,”
      (e.g., talking, reflecting, responding to questions). Children may have no clear view of
      what the therapy situation presents. This blurred view may range from having total mis-
      information to seeing the therapist as an agent of their parents, the school, the courts,
      or some other individual or institution that forced the initiation of treatment. The ther-
      apist may initially have to simply educate the child about therapy, explaining what it is
      and what it is not. Children may bring in distorted or stereotyped (“Oh, so you’re the
      shrink. Where’s your couch?”) perceptions of therapists. This author is reminded of one
      extremely anxious 12-year-old boy who failed to respond to the usual reassuring tech-
      niques in an initial therapy session. After some gentle probing, it was learned that the
      young man had watched one too many late-night horror movies in which the fiendish
      doctor had done bizarre things to his subjects. Somehow the boy had associated coming
      to the mental health clinic with the scenes in movies where the hero gets wired to a
      machine and is never the same again. When I (H.T. Prout) reassured him that the use
      of electrodes was not part of my approach and that we were simply going to talk about
      problems he was having at home and school, he visibly relaxed and began to volunteer
      all sorts of information.                                      
        Even as therapy progresses, it is necessary to monitor these perceptions. The child
      who views the therapist as the person he plays games with once a week is unlikely to
      focus on the tasks necessary to facilitate change. Similarly, there may be little agree-
      ment as to what changes are needed and what mutually acceptable treatment objectives
      are to be established. The therapist is likely to be faced with the predicament of rec-
      onciling, on the one hand, the goals of those who initiated treatment (e.g., parents,

=== Page 23 (1 cols) ===
Counseling and Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 9
                                                                     
          teachers) and, on the other hand, the child or adolescent client’s own view of what is
          needed. A parent-referred adolescent who has been arrested three times for shoplifting
                                                                     
          may verbalize a goal of having his parents “get off my case.” Although this position may
          be a factor in the acting out, it is not likely to produce an appropriate therapy objective,
          given the referral problem. Thus, the therapist must negotiate with the client appro-
          priate goals, objectives, and topics or content for the counseling. These goals may not
          necessarily be in total agreement with the aims of the referral source or the therapist,
          but they will provide a starting point. Objectives can always be renegotiated as the rela-
          tionship develops. Further, the therapist needs to demonstrate to the child or adolescent
                                                                     
          client that the client will get something out of counseling. Initially, this demonstration
          may take a form as simple as providing an interesting format. This accomplishment can
          lead to the establishment of a more congruent set of objectives.
            Another major difference between child and adult therapy is the child’s more limited
          verbal and linguistic development, which is also related to the limitations in cognitive
          development. Children may be unable to think in more abstract terms and may have
                                                                     
          evenmoredifficultyverballydescribinganddiscussingtheirthoughtsandemotions.This
          limited verbal ability is one of the main reasons play has been used as a medium of ther-
          apy. Play and other nonverbal techniques allow expression without creating anxiety or
          frustration for the child because of an inability to find the correct verbal description. Fur-
          ther, the child may not have the receptive vocabulary to fully understand what is being
          asked in the interview situation. This author once observed a psychiatric interview of a
          7-year-old girl in which the resident asked the child if she ever had any hallucinations.
                                                                     
          The little girl, obviously not knowing what was meant by the word “hallucination,”
          happily responded, “Oh, yes, all the time,” whereupon the resident made note of this
          finding and continued the interview along other lines. Therapy must be geared at the
          appropriate developmental level for both the child’s expressive and receptive language
          capabilities. While not de-emphasizing the worth of “talk therapy,” alternative modes of
          expression should be investigated for use in conjunction with verbal interactions. The
          therapist may also find it useful to teach the child labels and verbal mediators for emo-
                                                                     
          tional experiences. This course of action can involve using the traditionally accepted
          labels for feelings or using the child’s own terminology. An 8-year-old girl once accu-
          rately described several symptoms consistent with “feeling depressed.” The girl, however,
          felt more comfortable generally describing the state as one of “yuckiness.”
            Children also differ from adults in terms of their dependence on environmental forces
          and changes. Children are reactors to changes in their living situations rather than ini-
                                                                     
          tiators of change. They have relatively little power to take action to eliminate or prevent
          environmentalcausesofstress. Theyreacttoparentaldivorces,familymoves,andschool
          and peer pressures. The child’s disturbance may actually be a relatively normal reaction
          to upheaval or stress in the environment. Yet, children cannot divorce their parents,

=== Page 24 (1 cols) ===
10   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      change schools, or move at will. Because the child is dependent on the environment, it
      is more important for those in the environment to be involved in treatment. Where the
      adult is more likely to seek treatment independently, the child is less likely to be treated
      in isolation. Even if children make significant progress in individual therapy, they still
      do not have the options available to adults in dealing with the environment. In some
      cases, therapy may even proceed on the notion of helping the child cope with a stressful
      situation, rather than assuming that change will be forthcoming in the environment. For
      example, an 11-year-old can exert little impact on the drinking and resulting behavior
      of an alcoholic parent yet may be assisted in finding ways to deal with the problem that
      make the stress more manageable.                               
        Another factor that contributes to the difference between child therapy and adult
      therapy is that the child’s personality is less likely to be set than the adult’s. The child,
      whose defenses are not as well established, is more pliable and amenable to therapeutic
      influence once the relationship and cooperation are established. The personality is still
      developing and changing rapidly, yielding a greater potential for change. But at the same
      time, this situation presents a somewhat more labile client and can result in inconsis-
      tent responses in therapy session. The child has a greater range of normal emotional and
      behavioral responses as a result of the unformed nature of the personality. The therapist,
      therefore, can be more flexible and must anticipate and not be discouraged by seem-
      ingly broad swings of emotion and behavior in the course of treatment. The plasticity
      of the child’s personality is also an asset in the working out of a preventive model that
      heads off disturbing patterns with appropriate intervention prior to the crystallization of
      the personality.                                               
        As unpredictable as adolescents’ behavior is to those in their environment, a similar
      unpredictability exists in the therapeutic relationship. Adolescents entering the therapy
      situation are characteristically impatient, intolerant, and uncommunicative. They may
      fail to elaborate on any details of the current situation or difficulties presented. They
      may deny any responsibility for the current problems, preferring to place blame else-
      where, or may actually have almost no insight into the reasons they have been referred
      for treatment. Picture a 16-year-old male sitting in your office, slouched in a chair, a
      cap and long hair covering his averted eyes. His first words and only complete sentence
      for the next hour are: “I don’t want to talk to no f—king shrink.” A reflective state-
      ment on your part that he must be upset about something only brings a muffled grunt.
      A series of your best open-ended questions elicits only a series of unelaborated “Yes’s,”
      “No’s,” “I don’t know’s,” “Maybe’s,” and “It’s the damn teachers.” Your feeble attempts
      to introduce humor or to discuss safe topics bring only more grunts, a few eye rolls, or no
      response at all. His posture throughout the seemingly never-ending hour remains essen-
      tially unchanged. This initial session represents the base on which you will build your
      therapeutic relationship with the young man. It is little wonder that many therapists

=== Page 25 (1 cols) ===
Counseling and Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 11
                                                                     
          avoid such interactions. Despite our best rationalizing that the adolescent is reacting to
          the situation and not to us, it is often difficult to come out of such an unproductive ses-
                                                                     
          sion feeling as though we made progress and that our skills are up to the task of helping
          the adolescent.                                            
            Depending on the level of development and maturity, work with the adolescent may
          range from gamelike approaches utilized with younger children to therapy that resem-
          bles interventions with an adult presenting similar problems. Most adolescents will not
          be candidates for insight-oriented, in-depth therapy involving the reworking of previ-
          ous experiences. Goals may range from better self-understanding with some personality
                                                                     
          reorganization to simple stabilization and improved functioning without major person-
          ality change.                                              
            Unstructured probing, queries about deep personal feelings, or challengingthe adoles-
          cents to explain their misbehavior will likely produce further uncooperativeness or yield
          a strong emotional response. Beginning with factual information in a nonjudgmental
          manner will help allay initial anxieties. The therapist needs to explain how the rela-
                                                                     
          tionship will differ from those with parents, teachers, peers, and others. The goal at this
          level is to achieve engagement with the adolescent and then implant the initial seeds
          for establishing a motivation. The initial agreement from the adolescent may simply be
          to return to another session.                              
            The adolescent therapist will be more active in comparison with the adult thera-
          pist. Long silences, noncommittal responses, and long periods of formulating answers
          to the adolescent’s concerns should be avoided. Adolescent therapists may find they
                                                                     
          talk with these clients relatively more than with adult clients. Explaining thoughts
          explicitly, phrasing questions concretely, and, in general, using a direct approach will
          facilitate work with the adolescent. Many of the interpretive leads and nondirective
          probes used with adults may be perceived by the adolescent as trickery and may add
          to resistance. Therapists need to present themselves as genuine. A spontaneous, con-
          versational approach that is more akin to talking with a casual friend is recommended.
          The adolescent is likely to be curious about the therapist’s “real life,” and the therapist’s
                                                                     
          responsestosuchquestionsshouldbematter-of-factandnonevasive.Whilenotattempt-
          ing to influence values, the therapist should be willing to share personal opinions and
          attitudes with the adolescent. Acknowledgment of the adolescent’s feelings about var-
          ious issues and situations is helpful; the therapist should be particularly aware of the
          current teenage values, fads, slang, and so on, and be sensitive to the pressures related
          to adolescents’ social and emotional developmental levels. The therapist needs to com-
                                                                     
          municate a liking of, and interest in, the adolescent. This is best done indirectly because
          the adolescent will recognize the artificiality of an “I like you.” A sincere commitment
          to engage with the adolescent in mutual problem solving, along with other concrete
          gestures and expressions of interest, is most helpful. Finally, the therapist must work at

=== Page 26 (1 cols) ===
12   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      maintaining a balance along the continuum of independence-dependence. Adolescents
      should not be treated like children; yet they should not be given signals that they are
      entirely free to make all of their own life decisions.         
      INTEGRATION:  MULTIMODAL  AND MULTISYSTEMIC                    
      This book borrows (and somewhat bastardizes) the term multimodal initially introduced
      by Lazarus (1976) to describe the overall philosophy implicit in the subsequent chapters.
      Lazarus (2006, 2009) has been refined to some degree with the current model being
      fairly consistent with cognitive-behavior therapy. Lazarus presented his BASIC ID,
      an acronym for seven interactive modalities that are investigated as potential points
      of intervention for problems. The modes are Behavior, Affect, Sensation, Imagery,
      Cognition, Interpersonal relationships, and Drugs-Diet. This approach presents a
      comprehensive method of identifying problems and then deciding the most effective
      way to intervene. Keat (1979, 1990, 1996) expanded on this approach with his own
      acronym, BASIC IDEAL, by adding E for Educational or school pursuits, A for Adults
      in the child’s life (parents, teachers, relatives), and L for Learn the client’s culture.
        This book takes a broad view of what is “psychotherapeutic” for a child or an ado-
      lescent. By multimodal, we refer to the many types of interventions to help troubled
      children and adolescents. Kazdin (2000) identified more than 500 terms that have been
      used in the research and case study literature to describe interventions with children
      and adolescents. This nearly exhaustive list points to the many interventions we have
      available to facilitate therapeutic change with children and adolescents. There also
      exists a range in each alternative. Educational measures, for example, can range from
      resource room help to a full-time structured placement. Parental interventions may
      involve parenting classes or perhaps therapy for the parents. In most cases, a multi-
      modal,orcombined,approachwillbeused.Forexample,childrenmayreceiveindividual
      therapy, their parents may receive counseling, and the teacher may conduct a behavior
      management program. Although it is desirable to intervene in the most efficacious and
                                                                     
      cost-efficient manner, we do not make assumptions that one technique is preferable to
      or more therapeutic than others. At this point, neither research nor clinical experi-
      ence is able to identify whether a child with a low self-concept, for example, is helped
      more by 2 hours a week of individual therapy or by having a teacher who is trained
      to consistently provide positive successful school experience. We do not know whether
      group social skills training is more beneficial than family therapy. What we do know is
                                                                     
      that several types of intervention have some benefit for children and adolescents. The
      more interventions and systems that can be combined—the more modalities that are
      involved in the treatment—the more likely it is we will realize our overall therapeutic
      goals. This approach is not a “let’s try everything” plan. It involves careful assessment of

=== Page 27 (1 cols) ===
Counseling and Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 13
                                                                     
          problems, selection of appropriate interventions, and coordination and communication
          among those providing services. As long as our treatment programs are not excessively
                                                                     
          costly or time-consuming, interventions involving several modalities are indicated.
            This multimodal view also implies two other basic assumptions. First, professionals
          with a variety of backgrounds are involved in child treatment. A teacher with a bache-
          lor’s degree in special education may be working with a child who is receiving individual
          therapy from a psychiatrist who has completed a child psychiatry fellowship program. A
          high school guidance counselor may work individually with an adolescent whose family
          is in therapy with a licensed psychologist. A further assumption here is that a person
                                                                     
          does not have to be called a therapist to have therapeutic impact on a child. The sec-
          ond, related, assumption involves the settings where treatment takes place. Troubled
          children and adolescents receive treatment in, among other places, classrooms, schools,
          agencies, clinics, group homes, and hospitals. In this book, we do not make the artifi-
          cial distinction between counseling and psychotherapy. We assume that a similar core
          of principles and techniques can be adapted to many settings. Although the presenting
          problems may differ depending on the setting, we believe, for example, that a cognitively
                                                                     
          oriented school counselor will function in a manner relatively similar to a cognitively
          oriented psychiatrist in an inpatient setting. The overriding concern is the development
          of effective, coordinated, and multifaceted interventions. 
            Multisystemic therapy (MST) treatment was originally developed for interventions
          with antisocial and delinquent youth (Henggeler, Schoenwald, Borduin, & Rowland,
          1998).Theapproachisbasedonsocial-ecologicaltheorythatincludestreatmentconsid-
                                                                     
          erationsattheindividual,family,peer,school,andcommunitylevels.Inthisperspective,
          the individual child or adolescent is viewed as at the center of a variety of interacting
          and interdependent systems. Treatments aimed at these various systems can be done
          simultaneously and can ultimately impact the individual. All these levels are viewed
          as potentially contributing to the development of emotional and behavioral problems,
          as well as to the maintenance of the difficulties. The MST approach also emphasizes
          treatment in the natural environment.                      
                                                                     
            More recently, MST treatment has expanded to intervene with a broader range of
          psychological problems (Curtis, Ronan, & Borduin, 2004; Henggeler, Schoenwald, &
          Rowland, 2002; LaFavor and Randall, 2013; Rowland et al., 2000). Typically, MST has
          dealtwithchildrenandadolescentswithmoreseriousandpervasiveproblems.Anumber
          of basic tenets underlie MST:                              
                                                                     
                                                                     
            • Multisystemic therapy seeks to identify risk, protective, and maintaining factors
              in the natural environments.                           
            • Multisystemic therapy is family-based and shares some of the systemic perspec-
              tives of other family therapy approaches. However, MST tends to be more intense

=== Page 28 (1 cols) ===
14   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
           and emphasizes more linkages between the children/adolescents,their family, and
           other units in the broader natural social network.        
         • Treatments are goal-based with families having primary input in designation and
           selection of goals.                                       
         • Treatments heavily involve caregivers and aim to alter the networks on a longer
           term basis for maintenance of gains and changes.          
         • Treatments emphasize strengths and positives of the clients and their network
           and work at increasing responsibility across persons in the network.
         • Multisystemic therapy has a problem-solving, present, and action-oriented focus.
         • Treatments identify sequences between and among units in the network and seek
           to alter the sequences to facilitate change.              
        Although the overall theme of this book is on theories, these theories provide options
      in MST, particularly at the individual, family, group, and school level.
      RESEARCH  AND  EFFICACY                                        
      The effectiveness of psychotherapy has been controversial for many years, and this has
      been particularly notable in the child and adolescent area. The child and adolescent
      area is confounded/complicated by both developmental factors and systemic and family
      factors. Attempts to summarize research have been through traditional critical literature
      reviews with meta-analysis the more contemporary approach.     
                                                                     
      Historical and Traditional Reviews                             
                                                                     
      Since Eysenck’s (1952) classic and much-debated study on the effectiveness of psy-
      chotherapy with adults, researchers and clinicians have pondered the question, “Does
      psychotherapy work?” Eysenck’s study, generally recognized as having spawned consider-
      able research in psychotherapy, reviewed a number of studies of psychotherapy outcome
                                                                     
      withneuroticadults.Hisevaluationconcludedthatthepercentageoftreatedclientswho
      improved was not substantially different from the spontaneous remission rate (i.e., those
      individuals who improved without psychotherapy). He found that roughly two-thirds of
      each group, treated and untreated, reported improvement. Eysenck concluded that there
      was little evidence to support the effectiveness of psychotherapy with adult neurotics.
      Eysenck’s data and methodology have been cited, reanalyzed and reinterpreted, and crit-
      icized and condemned ever since. Despite its controversial nature, his study is important
                                                                     
      for the discussion, research, and examination of the therapeutic venture it has fostered.
        Systematically and carefully studying the psychotherapy effectiveness question is
      one of the most difficult research areas in the behavioral sciences. Understanding
      the process of psychotherapy and its relationship to behavior change is an extremely

=== Page 29 (1 cols) ===
Counseling and Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 15
                                                                     
          complex proposition. The six volumes of the Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behavior
          Change (Bergin & Garfield, 1971, 1994; Garfield & Bergin, 1978, 1986; Lambert, 2004,
                                                                     
          2013) point to both the methodological complexity and the enormity of the issues.
          These volumes have attempted to bring together current empirical knowledge and data
          on psychotherapy. To utilize current research findings or to attempt research in this
          area, we must be aware of the problems facing researchers: 
                                                                     
            • Psychotherapy represents a wide variety of techniques, in some ways preventing
              a clear, unambiguous definition of psychotherapy.      
                                                                     
            • Psychotherapy differs depending on the theoretical orientation of the therapist,
              the length of time of the treatment, and the format (i.e., individual, group, mar-
              ital, parent, family consultation).                    
            • The clinical definition of client populations may be ambiguous and thus limit
              generalizability.                                      
            • Clear definition of symptomatology and the client characteristics may vary in
                                                                     
              studies and be somewhat a result of the setting. Would two studies of treatment
              of anxious children produce similar results if one were conducted in a school and
              one at a clinic? Similarly, there are subgroups that might be studied separately
              (e.g., males versus females, Blacks versus Whites, disadvantaged, children).
            • Therapistsvaryinage,sex,training,orientation,competency,style,andpersonal-
              ity characteristics. Outcome could be affected by any one of these. Some research
              has studied the client/therapist match issue (i.e., whether a certain type of ther-
                                                                     
              apist works best with a certain type of client).       
            • Research can focus on process or content variables, or outcome. Process studies
              examine what goes on in therapy, typically some client/therapist interaction vari-
              able. Outcome studies examine whether the person is improved or whether there
              is behavioral or affective change following intervention. Although some studies
              attempt to relate process to outcome, both have been and continue to be studied
              extensively.                                           
                                                                     
            • In outcome studies, what represents appropriate measures to gauge therapeutic
              change? Do rating scales, personality tests, client report, therapist rating, or the
              reports of significant others validly and reliably reflect genuine change? What
              represents improvement?                                
            • Other methodological issues exist. Are single-subject research designs appro-
              priate for studying the general effectiveness of techniques? What represents an
                                                                     
              appropriate control group for those who receive treatment? Both those people
              on waiting lists for treatment and defectors (those who fail to return to the clinic
              for therapy) have been used in comparison studies. Do these groups represent
              ones that are clinically comparable to the experimental group?

=== Page 30 (1 cols) ===
16   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
         • Psychotherapy does not occur in isolation. How do we account for other extra-
           neous variables that may affect our results?              
         • What are the long-term effects of our interventions? Does a 1-year positive
           follow-up on clients treated for depression mean that these individuals will also
           suffer fewer problems with depression in the subsequent 5 or 10 years?
        Psychotherapy research with children and adolescents presents some special research
      problems. Levitt (1971), an early critic of psychotherapy with children and adolescents,
      noted that because the child is a developing organism, many of the symptomatic mani-
      festations of essentially normal children tend to disappear as a function of development.
      Some problems like temper tantrums, enuresis, specific fears, and sleep disturbance tend
      to go away in time. Levitt (1971) notes, “There is some reality in the common-sense
      notion that children ‘grow out’ of certain behavior problems” (p. 477). This makes it dif-
      ficult to sort out the effects of therapy versus the effects of maturation. Similarly, some
      problems that are indicative of underlying emotional disturbance may disappear as a
      function of development yet reappear in another form that Levitt calls “developmental
      symptom substitution” (p. 477). For example, a child successfully treated for enuresis
      at 8 years of age might be classified, for research purposes, as “cured” or “improved” yet
      present serious problems as an adolescent. Extending this view somewhat, research on
      the effects of childhood psychological treatment on later adult adjustment is difficult to
      do, yet this issue is an important one. Levitt also notes that, although the child may be
      the identified patient in clinical studies, persons other than the child may actually be
      the direct focus of treatment, thus making the isolation of treatment effects difficult.
        In reviewing psychotherapy research studies, we are left with certain impressions.
      Because of the difficulty in conducting research in this area, it is possible to critically
      examinealmostanysinglestudyanddismissitsresultsorofferalternativeexplanationsof
      the findings on methodological grounds. The orthodox experimental psychologist who
      spends the day in a rat laboratory might smirk at some of our research conclusions. But
      because we work with humans who have difficulties in living and because the allevia-
      tion of these difficulties is a complex process, we must take a somewhat softer view of
      the research. We must examine the literature with the understanding that few, if any,
      studies are going to answer absolutely the question, “Does psychotherapy work?” Rather,
      we must continue to critically examine the data and conclusions and to glean from the
      research those implications that relate most directly to our clinical work. This proposal
      is made not to support sloppy research or blanket acceptance or rejection of findings but
                                                                     
      to support a flexible and open-minded view of the current literature and status of the
      psychotherapy venture.                                         
        The effectiveness of psychotherapy with children has been chronicled in reviews by
      Levitt in 1957, 1963, and 1971, and in a review by Barrett, Hampe, and Miller in 1978.

=== Page 31 (1 cols) ===
Counseling and Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 17
                                                                     
          Levitt’s 1957 study was modeled after Eysenck’s (1952) study of the effectiveness of
          adult psychotherapy. Surveying reports of evaluation at both the close of therapy and
                                                                     
          at follow-up and comparing them with similar evaluations of untreated children, Levitt
          found that two-thirds of the evaluations at close and three-fourths at follow-up showed
          improvement.Roughlythesamepercentageswerefoundintheuntreatedcontrolgroups.
          Levitt wrote: “It now appears that Eysenck’s conclusion concerning the data for adult
          psychotherapy is applicable to children as well; the results do not support the hypothe-
          sis that recovery from neurotic disorder is facilitated by psychotherapy” (p. 193). Levitt
          noted, however, that his evaluation “does not prove that psychotherapy (with children)
                                                                     
          is futile” (p. 194) and recommended “a cautious, tongue-in-cheek attitude toward child
          psychotherapy” (p. 194) until additional evidence became available. The 1963 study uti-
          lizes a similar methodology and again concluded that the hypothesis that psychotherapy
          facilitated recovery from emotional problems could not be supported. Some of the 1963
          data did suggest that comparisons should be made in diagnostic categories. Levitt also
          found that improvement rates tended to be lowest for cases of antisocial acting out and
                                                                     
          delinquency and highest for identifiable behavioral symptoms like enuresis and school
          phobia. The 1971 review departed slightly from the previous reviews and looked at a
          wider range of modalities than just child psychopathology. These included the effects of
          inpatient versus outpatient treatment, drug therapy, type of special class placement, and
          the use of mothers as therapists. Although individual studies showed some effectiveness,
          the overall conclusion again pointed to a lack of proof that these interventions are gen-
          erally helpful. Levitt (1971) also focused on two identifiable diagnostic classifications,
                                                                     
          juvenile delinquency and school phobia, for further examination. School phobia tended
          to respond favorably to treatment, but Levitt questioned whether treatment was simply
          removing the symptoms of more serious underlying core problems that would surface
          in some other form later. Conventional psychotherapy with delinquents appeared to be
          generallyineffective,butsomemoderatelypositiveresultswerefoundinexaminingmore
          comprehensive treatment programs for delinquents. In addition to still questioning the
          effectiveness of child psychotherapy, Levitt was able to provide some preliminary con-
                                                                     
          clusions. He noted that many of the principles on which traditional psychoanalytically
          based child guidance treatment have been based are now being challenged by research.
          The evidence at that time did not support the necessity of involving the mother in treat-
          ment, the relative insignificance of father involvement, the relationship of outcome to
          intensity of treatment, the desirability of encouraging the expression of negative feeling,
          ignoring undesirable behavior, or the notion that the home or family situation is likely
                                                                     
          to be more therapeutic than other child-care settings. In other words, many principles
          that had guided, and probably still do guide, much of traditional child treatment sim-
          ply are not supported in the research. Rigid orthodoxies are not empirically supported,
          although few of the innovative treatments are definitely supported either. Levitt called

=== Page 32 (1 cols) ===
18   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      for more studies of treatment of specific diagnostic classifications and more long-range
      follow-up studies.                                             
        Two other reviews of treatment bear mentioning. First, Abramowitz (1976) reviewed
      efficacy studies of group psychotherapy with children, reaching a conclusion similar
      to the reviews of individual therapy. Definitive conclusions are not possible at this
      point, and, based on available data, favorable responses to group therapy are not
      indicated. However, if a group therapy approach is indicated, the feasibility of using
      a behavioral approach might be considered first. Second, Tramontana (1980) has
      reviewed psychotherapy outcome research with adolescents and offered conclusions
      not much different from other reviews. Noting a sparseness in the adolescent literature,
      Tramontana (1980) found no clear evidence of effectiveness but found the area to be
      fraught with research methodology problems.                    
        Thus, through the 1980s, the dominant research conclusion was that psychother-
      apy was not effective with children and adolescents. Weisz, Doss, and Hawley (2005)
      reviewed 40 (1962 to 2002) years of research on psychotherapy for child and adolescent
      mental health problems. Their review was intended to both summarize and critique the
      knowledge base. They concluded that these initial conclusions about effectiveness had a
      number of problems in the existing research. Among these problems were poorly defined
      theoretical perspectives, few randomized clinical studies, poor descriptions of sample
      characteristics (including diagnoses), most studies not detailing ethnicity or racial char-
      acteristics, small sample sizes, and poorly defined treatment targets.
        Weisz et al. (2005) noted some progress methodologically more toward the end of
      the period they studied. Yet, they felt the conclusion of earlier researchers regarding the
      ineffectiveness of child/adolescent psychotherapy was not warranted.
      Meta-Analyses                                                  
      The reviews previously noted could all be classified as evaluating the child psychother-
      apy research literature through the traditional critical literature review approach. The
      systematic approach of meta-analysis is now the standard for summarizing psychother-
      apy research. This approach combines the results of efficacy studies by evaluating the
      magnitude of the effect of treatments. Smith and Glass (1977) popularized this statis-
      tical approach in the psychotherapy literature. In a meta-analysis, each outcome result
      in a controlled study is treated as one unit of magnitude of effect or effect size (ES).
      The effect size is calculated by subtracting the mean of the control group (M
                                                     c               
                                                     ) from the      
      mean of the treated group (M                                   
                         t                                           
                         ) and then dividing the difference by the standard devi-
      ation of the control group (SD                                 
                          c                                          
                          ): ES                                      
                              =                                      
                               M                                     
                                t                                    
                                 −                                   
                                   M                                 
                                    c                                
                                     /SD                             
                                       c                             
                                       . The effect sizes are averaged to
      determine average effects across and between treatments. The effect size is a standard
      score that indicates how many standard deviation units a treatment group differs from an
      untreated control group. A positive effect size indicates improvement or the beneficial

=== Page 33 (1 cols) ===
Counseling and Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 19
                                                                     
          effects of treatment. For example, an effect size of 1.00 indicates that untreated subjects
          at the mean of their group (i.e., the 50th percentile) would be expected, on average, to
                                                                     
          rise to the 84th percentile (i.e., a one standard deviation improvement) with treatment.
          Evaluating across all types of counseling and psychotherapy, Smith and Glass (1977)
          found an average effect size of .68.                       
            Cohen (1988) proposed guidelines for interpreting effect sizes: a “small” effect size is
          .20, a “medium” effect size is .50, and a “large” effect size is .80. Cohen noted, however,
          these guidelines may be different for each field of study. 
            As the meta-analytic approach has evolved, many meta-analyses have been com-
                                                                     
          pleted on the effectiveness of child/adolescent counseling and psychotherapy. Casey and
          Berman (1985) analyzed studies done with primarily younger children (under age 13)
          who received some form of psychotherapy, while Prout and DeMartino (1986) evalu-
          ated studies of children and adolescents who received interventions for school-based or
          school-related problems. Respectively, they found effect sizes across treatments of .71
          and .58. These overall effect sizes are generally consistent with the meta-analyses done
                                                                     
          primarily with adult subjects. Using a model for evaluating the relative size of treatment
          effects proposed by Cohen (1988), these effect sizes fall into the “moderate” effect size
          category. The importance of some of these initial meta-analyses was best summarized by
          Casey and Berman (1985). Despite some shortcomings in the diagnostic and method-
          ological areas, they felt that the available outcome studies demonstrated the efficacy
          of treatment across a range of therapeutic approaches and problems. Specifically, they
          noted: “Clinicians and researchers need not be hesitant in defending the merits of psy-
                                                                     
          chotherapy with children” (p. 397).                        
            Since those initial meta-analyses, there have been numerous studies focusing on both
          the general effectiveness of child/adolescent psychotherapies as well as studies on spe-
          cific approaches (e.g., cognitive-behavior therapy [CBT]) and for specific disorders (e.g.,
          depression). A summary of all these studies is beyond the scope of this chapter. Two
          recent reviews summarize the current state of the research. Zirkelback and Reese (2011)
          reviewed a number of broad-based meta-analyses conducted between 1985 and 2006.
                                                                     
          Effect sizes ranged from .30 to .97, with most falling into the “medium” range of effec-
          tiveness. Zirkelback and Reese (2011) concluded, noting effect sizes averaging around
          .70 (                                                      
             +                                                       
              /–), that a treated child or adolescent is generally better off than a child not pro-
          vided treatment. Weisz (2014) examined some of the same meta-analyses and found
          a similar range and typical effect size, but cautioned about the generalizability across
          contexts (e.g., disorders, settings).                      
            In the first edition of this book, we noted that the outcome research on child and
          adolescent psychotherapy left us with an unclear and confusing impression (Prout,
          1983). The available reviews at the time did not support effectiveness, nor did they
          prove the ineffectiveness of child/adolescent therapeutic interventions. Yet, at the same

=== Page 34 (1 cols) ===
20   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      time, they pointed to the complexity of the issue and the methodological problems in
      conducting research in this area. Although there remain some unresolved questions
      concerning the efficacy of child and adolescent therapeutic interventions, the array
      of meta-analyses present systematic reviews indicating some degree of benefit to these
      interventions. The question of effectiveness is more clearly answered at this point.
      Further, data appear to support the greater efficacy of certain types of interventions,
      notably those falling in the broad category of cognitive-behavioral interventions. There
      is now support that therapeutic interventions with children and adolescents are a viable
      clinical activity. Nonetheless, we continue to recommend a cautious, thoughtful, and
      examining approach to child and adolescent treatment.          
      THE  ROLE OF EVIDENCE IN PRACTICE                              
      As the practice of counseling and psychotherapy has evolved, there has been increasing
      evidence from both within and beyond the mental health professions that our interven-
      tions and treatments are beneficial. Two perspectives address this issue. First is evidence-
      based practice, which is associated with empirically supported treatments. The second is
      often called practice-based evidence, which examines the role of client/patient feedback
      in the therapeutic process. Although there has been some controversy comparing the
      approaches, we feel that they are not incompatible with one another.
                                                                     
      Empirically Supported Treatments                               
                                                                     
      Although there are different definitions of empirically supported treatments (ESTs),
      these treatments generally refer to therapies that have been evaluated in a randomized
      control study, have clearly defined treatment targets and/or diagnoses, have a clearly
      established treatment protocol (e.g., a treatment manual) that can be replicated, have
      shown significant treatment outcome benefits, and have been shown to be effective
                                                                     
      in more than one study (http://www.div12.org/empirically-supported-treatments). The
      Society of Clinical Psychology maintains the website that summarizes the current status
      of treatment in several areas (http://www.div12.org/empirically-supported-treatments).
      Sources of information specifically dealing with children and adolescent include
      Evidence-Based Psychotherapies for Children and Adolescents (Weisz & Kazdin, 2010)
      and Treatments that Work with Children: Empirically Supported Strategies for Managing
      Childhood Problems (Christophersen & Vansoyoc, 2013).          
                                                                     
        The EST approach has become very prominent in recent years. It has been criticized
      for being perhaps too narrow in dealing with actual problems in practice. Notably, the
      EST approach is typically tied to a specific disorder or problem. In practice, children and
      adolescents often present with multiple problems (e.g., an adolescent with a conduct

=== Page 35 (1 cols) ===
Counseling and Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 21
                                                                     
          disorder and depression) or comorbidity. Additionally, there still remains large gaps in
          the child/adolescent EST literature; that is, some problems do not yet have an associ-
                                                                     
          ated EST or the EST literature does not match the child characteristics or treatment
          context.                                                   
                                                                     
          Practice-Based Evidence                                    
          Practice-basedevidenceisassociatedwiththeuseofsystematicfeedbackandmonitoring
          of client/patient status during the course of treatment. Duncan (2013) argues that the
                                                                     
          relationship aspects of therapy remain integral to effectiveness and that the relationship
          isenhancedbysolicitingfeedbackfromtheclient/patient,withcollaborativemonitoring
          of outcome. Duncan feels that this process is one of the core ingredients to therapeutic
          progress regardless of therapeutic approach.               
            The systematic monitoring of progress is typically on a session-by-session basis. The
          child/adolescent therapist has options in two well-developed and tested progress mon-
          itoring approaches. Duncan and his colleagues have developed various versions of the
                                                                     
          Outcome Rating Scale (ORS), initially developing an adult version (Miller, Duncan,
          Brown, Sparks, & Claud, 2003) and followed by child versions (Duncan, Sparks, Miller,
          Bohanske & Claud, 2006). These scales are brief visual analogue self-report ratings of
          general status and well-being. More detailed information on these scales can be found at
          https://heartandsoulofchange.com. Similarly, Lambert and his colleagues (Burlingame,
          Wells, Lambert, & Cox, 2004) developed youth versions of outcome questionnaires
          (OQ) modeled after adult versions of their outcome measures. The youth versions
                                                                     
          include questionnaires for parent and youth. Information on the OQ measures can
          be found at (http://www.oqmeasures.com). Both the ORS and OQ approaches are
          designed to be completed quickly and are a regular part of ongoing treatment.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          CONCLUSION                                                 
          This chapter has provided an overview of the broad area of the psychological treat-
                                                                     
          ment of children and adolescents. Many issues are important to those who do clinical
          work with children. The mental health needs of children create enormous demands
          that the social services and mental health delivery system have not yet even closely
          met. The child/adolescent therapist must be aware of developmental factors and plan
          and conduct treatment accordingly. Further, the therapist must be aware of the unique
          aspects of the therapeutic relationship with children and adolescents. A multimodal,
                                                                     
          combined approach to treatment is advocated, necessitating a broad view of what may
          potentially be therapeutic for the child/adolescent client. Finally, the question of effi-
          cacy has become somewhat less debatable since the earlier editions of this book. There
          is now moderate but clear support for the general effectiveness of child and adolescent

=== Page 36 (1 cols) ===
22   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      therapeutic interventions although the evolving literature and research base continue
      to point to the complexity of the issue. The professional has expanded options with
      evidence-based practice and practice-based evidence strategies.
      REFERENCES                                                     
      Abramowitz, C. V. (1976). The effectiveness of group psychotherapy with children. Archives of
        General Psychiatry, 33, 320–326.                             
      Axline, V. (1947). Play therapy. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. 
      Barrett, C. L., Hampe, I. E., & Miller, L. (1978). Research on psychotherapy with children. In
        S. L. Garfield & A. D. Bergin (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (2nd ed.,
        pp. 411–436). New York, NY: Wiley.                           
      Bergin, A. E., & Garfield, S. L. (Eds.). (1971). Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change.
        New York, NY: Wiley.                                         
      Bergin, A. E., & Garfield, S. L. (Eds.). (1994). Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (4th
        ed.). New York, NY: Wiley.                                   
      Berlin, I. M. (Ed.). (1975). Advocacy for child mental health. New York, NY: Brunner/ Mazel.
      Bower, E. M. (1969). The early identification of emotionally handicapped children in school (2nd ed.).
        Springfield, IL: Thomas.                                     
      Burlingame,G.M.,Wells,M.G.,Lambert,M.J.,&Cox,J.C.(2004).YouthOutcomeQuestion-
        naire (Y-OQ). In M. E. Maruish (Ed.), The use of psychological testing for treatment planning and
        outcome assessments: Volume 2: Instruments for children and adolescents (3
                                                 rd                  
                                                  ed, pp. 235-273).  
        Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.                                
      Casey, R. J., & Berman, J. S. (1985). The outcome of psychotherapy with children. Psychological
        Bulletin, 98, 388–400.                                       
      Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013, May 16). Mental health surveillance among
        children—United States, 2005–2011. MMWR 2013;62(Suppl.):1–35.
      Christophersen, E. R., & Vansoyoc, S. L. (2013). Treatments that work with children: Empirically
        supported strategies for managing childhood problems (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psy-
        chological Association.                                      
      Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ:
        Erlbaum.                                                     
      Cowen, E. (1973). Social and community interventions. Annual Review of Psychology, 24,
        243–271.                                                     
      Curtis,N.M.,Ronan,K.R.,&Borduin,C.M.(2004).Multisystemictreatment:Ameta-analysis
        of outcome studies. Journal of Family Psychology, 18, 411–419.
      Dolgin, K. G. (2010). The adolescent: Development, relationships, and culture (13th ed). Upper
        Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.                                   
      Doll, B. (1996). Prevalence of psychiatric disorders in children and youth: An agenda for advo-
        cacy by school psychology. School Psychology Quarterly, 11, 20–47.
      Duncan, B. (2013). What makes a master therapist? Psychotherapy in Australia, 20, 58–66.

=== Page 37 (1 cols) ===
Counseling and Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 23
                                                                     
          Duncan, B., Spark, J., Miller, S., Bohanske, R., & Claud, D. (2006). Giving youth a voice: A
            preliminary study of the reliability and validity of a brief outcome measure for children, ado-
            lescents, and caretakers. Journal of Brief Therapy, 5, 71-87.
          Eysenck, H. J. (1952). The effects of psychotherapy: An evaluation. Journal of Consulting Psychol-
                                                                     
            ogy, 16, 319–324.                                        
          Freud, S. (1955). Analysis of a phobia in a 5-year-old boy. London, England: Hogarth Press. (Orig-
            inal work published 1909)                                
          Garfield,S.L.,&Bergin,A.E.(Eds.).(1978).Handbookofpsychotherapyandbehaviorchange(2nd
            ed.). New York, NY: Wiley.                               
          Garfield, S. L., & Bergin, A. E. (Eds.). (1986). Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (3rd
            ed.). New York, NY: Wiley.                               
          Henggeler, S. S., Schoenwald, S. K., Borduin, C. M., & Rowland, M. D. (1998). Multi-systemic
            treatment of antisocial behavior in children and adolescents. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
          Henggeler, S. S., Schoenwald, S. K., & Rowland, M. D. (2002). Serious emotional disturbance in
            children and adolescents: Multisystemic therapy. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
          Huang, L., Stroul, B., Friedman, R., Mrazek, P., Friesen, B., Pires, S., & Mayberg, S. (2005).
            Transforming mental health care for children and their families. American Psychologist, 60,
            615–627.                                                 
          Kazdin, A. E. (2000). Psychotherapy for children and adolescents: Directions for research and practice.
                                                                     
            New York, NY: Oxford University Press.                   
          Kazdin, A. E. (2003). Psychotherapy for children and adolescents. Annual Review of Psychology,
            54, 253–276.                                             
          Kazdin, A. E., & Johnson, B. (1994). Advances in psychotherapy for children and adolescents:
            Interrelations of adjustment, development, and intervention. Journal of School Psychology, 32,
            217–246.                                                 
          Keat, D. B. (1979). Multimodal therapy with children. New York, NY: Pergamon Press.
          Keat, D. B. (1990). Child multimodal therapy. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
          Keat, D. B. (1996). Multimodal therapy with children: Anxious Ashley. Psychotherapy in Private
            Practice, 15, 63–79.                                     
          Klein, M. (1932). The psychoanalysis of children. London, England: Hogarth Press.
          LaFavor, T., & Randall, J. (2013). Multisystemic family therapy. In A. Rambo, C. West, A. L.
            Schooley, & T. V. Boyd (Eds.), Family therapy review: Contrasting contemporary model (pp.
            100–108). New York, NY: Routledge/Taylor & Francis.      
                                                                     
          Lambert, M. J. (Ed.). (2004). Bergin and Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change.
            Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.                                      
          Lambert, M. J. (Ed.). (2013). Bergin and Garfield’s handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change
            (6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.                           
          Lazarus, A. A. (1976). Multimodal behavior therapy. New York, NY: Springer.
          Lazarus, A. A. (2006). Brief but comprehensive psychotherapy: The multimodal way. New York, NY:
            Springer.                                                
          Lazarus, A. A. (2009). General principles and empirically supported techniques of cognitive
            behavior therapy. In W. T. O’Donohue & J. E. Fisher (Eds.), Cognitive behavior therapy:

=== Page 38 (1 cols) ===
24   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        Applying empirically supported techniques in your practice (2nd ed., pp. 440–444). Hoboken, NJ:
        Wiley.                                                       
      Levitt, E. E. (1957). The results of psychotherapy with children: An evaluation. Journal of Con-
        sulting Psychology, 21, 186–189.                             
      Levitt, E. E. (1963). Psychotherapy with children: A further evaluation. Behavior Research and
        Therapy, 60, 326–329.                                        
      Levitt, E. E. (1971). Research on psychotherapy with children. In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield
        (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (pp. 474–494). New York, NY: Wiley.
      Miller, S., Duncan, B., Brown, J., Sparks, J., & Claud, D. (2003). The Outcome Rating Scale: A
        preliminary study of reliability, validity, and feasibility of a brief visual analog measure. Journal
        of Brief Therapy, 2, 91-100.                                 
      Nuffield,E.J.(1968).Childpsychiatrylimited:Aconservativeviewpoint.JournaloftheAmerican
        Academy of Child Psychiatry, 7, 210–212.                     
      Prout, H. T. (1983). Counseling and psychotherapy with children and adolescents: An overview.
        In H. T. Prout & D. T. Brown (Eds.), Counseling and psychotherapy with children and adolescents:
        Theory and practice for school and clinic settings (pp. 3–34). Tampa, FL: Mariner.
      Prout, H. T., & DeMartino, R. A. (1986). A meta-analysis of school-based studies of psychother-
        apy. Journal of School Psychology, 24, 285–292.              
       Rowland,M.D.,Henggeler,S.W.,Gordon,A.M.,Pickrel,S.G.,Cunningham,P.B.,&Edwards,
        J. E. (2000). Adapting multisystemic therapy to serve youth presenting with psychiatric emer-
        gencies: Two case studies. Child Psychology and Psychiatry Review, 51, 30–43.
       Smetana, J. G., Campione-Barr, N., & Metzger, A. (2006). Adolescent development in interper-
        sonal and societal contexts. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 255–284.
       Smith, M. L., & Glass, G. V. (1977). Meta-analysis of psychotherapy outcome studies. American
        Psychologist, 32, 752–760.                                   
       Steinberg, L., & Morris, A. S. (2001). Adolescent development. Annual Review of Psychology, 52,
        83–110.                                                      
       Tolan, P. H., & Dodge, K. A. (2005). Children’s mental health as a primary care and concern: A
        system for comprehensive support and service. American Psychologist, 60, 601–614.
      Tramontana, M. G. (1980). Critical review of research on psychotherapy with adolescents:
        1967–1977. Psychological Bulletin, 88, 429–450.              
      Wadsworth, B. J. (2003). Piaget’s theory of cognitive and affective development: Foundations of con-
        structivism (5th ed). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.       
      Weisz, J. R. (2014). Building robust psychotherapies for children and adolescents. Perspectives on
        Psychological Science, 9, 81–84.                             
      Weisz, J. R., Doss, A. J., & Hawley, K. M. (2005). Youth psychotherapy outcome research: A
        review and critique of the evidence base. Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 337–363.
      Weisz, J. R., & Kazdin, A. E. (2010). Evidence based psychotherapies for children and adolescents.
        (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.                     
      Zirkelback, E. A., & Reese, R. J. (2011). A review of psychotherapy outcome research: Consid-
        eration for school-based mental health providers. Psychology in the Schools, 47, 1084–1100.

=== Page 39 (1 cols) ===
CHAPTER                             
                                   2                                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                 Ethical     and   Legal   Issues   in               
                                                                     
             Psychological       Interventions        with           
                                                                     
                                                                     
                 Children      and    Adolescents                    
                                                                     
                A                                                    
                 LICIA                                               
                    L. F                                             
                       EDEWA                                         
                           , S                                       
                             USAN                                    
                                 M. P                                
                                    ROUT                             
                                       ,                             
                                        AND                          
                                           H. T                      
                                              HOMPSON                
                                                     P               
                                                      ROUT           
          T  he practice of child therapy has been in existence for several decades but, unlike
             its adult counterpart, has had historically less research, development, and classifi-
          cation systems designed specifically for it. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-5;
          American Psychiatric Association, 2013) is comprised primarily of adult diagnostic cat-
          egories that have been applied to children and adolescents. Although more emphasis
          has been placed on children and youth with the most recent revision, empirically based
          information continues to be lacking for individuals under the age of 18. Although this
          has changed in the past 10 years, the field of child therapy generally continues to lack
          a sufficient body of empirically based research related to diagnosis and interventions, in
          both therapeutic and psychopharmacological areas, as well as coordination of both types
          of interventions. According to Mash and Dozois (2003), the knowledge base for chil-
          dren and adolescents is often comprised by the fragmented and unsystematic methods
          that have been used as well as the difficulties inherent in research with children and
          adolescents. Similarly, the professional ethical and legal considerations, as they pertain
          to therapy services for children, have also been limited. Yet the Surgeon General Reports
          that 20% of children and adolescents will experience mental health problems and that
          approximately10%to15%ofschool-agedyoutharefunctionallyimpairedduetomental
          illness (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services [USDHHS], 2012). The dele-
          terious effects of mental health on children and adolescent’s academic performance and
                                    25

=== Page 40 (1 cols) ===
26   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      social-emotional development have been well documented (Doll & Cummings, 2008).
      Thus, it is imperative that professionals providing services to children and youth be
      knowledgeable of both ethical and legal issues. Although the historical emphasis has
      been primarily in adult psychotherapy and the therapist’s role in relation to the adult
      client, different issues arise, both ethically and legally, when children are the recipients
      of therapeutic interventions. Ross (1980, p. 62) succinctly categorized the issues with
      children: “The ethical implications of treating an individual’s psychological problems
      increase in magnitude as an inverse function of that individual’s freedom of choice.”
        Ethical considerations, by nature, do not have to be and often are not simple or
      straightforward. Nor do ethical considerations have black-and-white solutions; yet they
      are nonetheless critical to child clinicians and mental health service providers. It is
      important that therapists understand their role as it pertains to children’s legal rights as
      well as the ramifications, both negative and positive, of therapeutic interventions with
      minors.Parentallegalrightsandthechild’sroleinthefamilyandaschoolsettingarealso
      ethical areas that need to be considered when providing services to a child. There are
      times that Ethics may require a higher standard of behavior than the current policies and
      pertinent laws (National Association of School Psychologists [NASP], 2010; National
      Association of Social Workers [NASW], 2008). Ethical behaviors are related to those
      involving general professional competency, professional relationships, students, parents,
      legal guardians or surrogates, community, and school psychology trainees and interns.
        The purpose of this chapter is to discuss the legal and ethical considerations involved
      with the provision of therapeutic services to children and adolescents. A brief review of
      general ethical principles is followed by a discussion of special considerations in working
      with child/adolescent populations. Legal issues related to definitions of treatment,
      confidentiality and privileged communication, informed consent, records and privacy,
      and special considerations in schools are discussed. Legal cases and precedent are also
      presented to provide a historical overview of ethical issues.  
      ETHICAL  ISSUES                                                
                                                                     
      Virtually all human service, educational, and medical associations have an ethical code
      or set of ethical principles to guide the professional behavior of their practitioners. These
      codes provide a basis and reference point for decision making in general case situations
      as well as crisis situations (Jacob & Hartshorne, 2011). The NASP (2010, p. 1) states
      that ethics are the “formal principles that elucidate the proper conduct of a professional
                                                                     
      school psychologist” and additionally that at times ethics “may require a more stringent
      standard of conduct than law” (p. 2). These codes or principles are not legally binding,
      although their foci may overlap with some statutes. This is perhaps one of the major
      distinctions between ethical and legal principles. A violation of an ethical principle,

=== Page 41 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 27
                                                                     
          when a related statute does not exist, can result in censure, probation, or expulsion
          by the respective professional organization. Evidence of unethical practice may sup-
                                                                     
          port documentation in a legal case, but by itself has consequences related only to the
          professional organization.                                 
            The ethical guidelines of the major helping service professions (e.g., American Coun-
          seling Association [ACA], 2014; American Psychological Association [APA], 2002;
          American School Counselor Association [ASCA], 2010; NASP, 2010; National Asso-
          ciation of Social Workers [NASW], 2008) provide codes that, in part, relate to ethical
          considerationsinconductingpsychologicalinterventionswithchildrenandadolescents.
                                                                     
          Numerous similarities and consistent themes across these sets of ethical principles are
          noted. Additionally, many of these principles are interrelated. Some general themes that
          are relevant to the practice of child/adolescent therapy are reviewed in this chapter.
          Specific sets of ethical guidelines also exist for each discipline and are available on each
          organization’s website.                                    
            The following section provides an overview of several ethical principles related to
                                                                     
          therapeutic intervention with children and adolescents, particularly counseling. Not all
          the ethical principles of the pertinent associations can be presented here. The prin-
          ciples reviewed here include responsibility and client welfare, confidentiality, parent
          notification or involvement, professional relationships, competence, public statements
          and presentations, and private practice or school issues. When working with children,
          depending on the setting, it can be assumed that the client can include a child, parents
          or guardians, teachers, additional school personnel, supervisors, and trainees (NASP,
                                                                     
          2010). According to Smith (2003), although the way to avoid ethical problems is for a
          professional to evaluate a situation for probable or possible conflicts and discuss them
          in advance with colleagues and the student and parents, all ethical quandaries cannot
          be predicted. Professional self-evaluation of the appropriateness and effectiveness of the
          services provided is important. The NASP (2010, p. 2) in the Principles for Professional
          Ethics states that school psychologists act as advocates for all students and are “com-
          mitted to the application of their professional expertise for the purpose of promoting
                                                                     
          improvement in the quality of life for students, families, and school communities.”
            The ideas of responsibility and client welfare refer to professionals assuming respon-
          sibility for their position of influence with clients and recognizing the consequences
          of their actions and professional activities. In doing so, they promote foremost the
          welfare of their client(s). With regard to psychological interventions, professionals
          must use techniques that have the likelihood of promoting therapeutic gain based
                                                                     
          on empirical research findings in their clients and accept the responsibility of the
          consequences/results/changes from using these techniques. Professionals should avoid
          conflicts of interest about their clients, clarifying allegiances between their clients,
          employers, agencies, and other persons directly involved (ASCA, 2010). Clients should

=== Page 42 (1 cols) ===
28   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      be fully informed about the services offered by the professional as well as any changes to
      a treatment plan that are experimental (APA, 2002; Standard 10.01b). When a client
      is clearly not benefiting from services, the professional should alter or terminate the
      therapeutic relationship. When providing services to a child or adolescent under the age
      of 18, the parents or guardian, in addition to the student, must be fully informed about
      the intervention and expected outcomes. Practitioners have the ethical responsibility to
      use techniques that respect the dignity and autonomy of the child (Jacob & Hartshorne,
      2011), which should include an explanation of the nature of the intervention, whether
      there is a choice in participating, and a discussion of confidentiality when the child
      reaches school age. Although the objective of a therapeutic, counseling relationship
      is to alleviate a student’s difficulties through continuous, planned interactions and/or
      by facilitating change in the student’s environment, most often school or home, it is
      important for professionals working in both clinical and school settings to remember
      that a primary responsibility, when working with children and adolescents, is to protect
      them from harm. A school psychologist has the ethical responsibility to function as a
      child advocate, with their primary responsibility lying with protecting the rights and
      welfare of the child (NASP, 2010).                             
        Professionals have the responsibility to protect the confidentiality of information gath-
      ered in the context of a therapeutic relationship. The ethical principle of confidentiality
      should be distinguished from the legal concept of confidentiality, which is discussed
      later in this chapter. Information should be released only with the permission of the
      client, with special provisions to protect those clients who cannot give informed con-
      sent. Professional cases should be discussed only with directly concerned colleagues.
      This information and the client’s identity should be disguised if it is used in other con-
      texts (e.g., teaching, training, case examples), or the client’s consent should be obtained.
      Confidentiality also relates to the proper maintenance, storage, and disposal of notes or
      records of counseling or therapeutic interventions (ACA, 2014; APA, 2010; ASCA,
      2010; NASP, 2010; NASW, 2008). The most recent APA ethics code (2002) removes
      the prohibition against releasing test information to persons who are not qualified to
      interpret the raw test data. According to the 2002 Code of Ethics, psychologists must
      release test data to clients (or to their parents if under age 18) and their designee when
      a written release of the records is provided (Smith, 2003). Without a written request
      for records, test data is released only with a court order or in accordance with the law.
      According to Smith, the 2002 APA code does allow psychologists to withhold test data
      when necessary to protect them from substantial harm or misuse or interpretation of
      the data or the test. However, caution is suggested when withholding this informa-
      tion because the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) does
      not recognize misinterpretation or use of tests as a valid reason to withhold medical
      records (Smith, 2003). An additional change to the 2002 ethics code of the APA is the

=== Page 43 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 29
                                                                     
          definition of the terms test data and test materials. Test data are considered to be “raw
          and scaled scores, client/patient responses to test questions or stimuli, and psychologists’
                                                                     
          notes and recording concerning client/patient statements and behavior during examina-
          tion”inadditionto“portionsoftestmaterialsthatincludeclient/patientresponses.”Test
          materials are defined as “manuals, instruments, protocols, and test questions or stimuli”
          and don’t include test data (APA, 2002, p. 14; Section 9.04).
            Issues related to professional relationships involve relationships with colleagues, clients,
          and other concerned parties. Professionals should develop and maintain relationships
          with other colleagues in the human service area. They should be aware of the traditions
                                                                     
          and practices of those in other professional disciplines and groups to cooperate with and
          use the resources of these other professionals. Therapeutic services should not be offered
          to a client who is receiving services from another professional. However, at times a child
          or adolescent may be receiving services from a mental health agency or private provider
          outside the school, and seeing a school-based professional, such as guidance counselor,
          school psychologist, or school social worker, for problems more specifically occurring in
                                                                     
          the school setting, such as anger control or peer interaction difficulties. It is imperative
          that release of information or consent forms be obtained from the parent or guardian
          to facilitate communication and coordination of services between both the community
          and school-based professionals to ensure that the most appropriate services are provided
          to the child or adolescent. Professionals should be aware that multiple parties may be
          concerned about the welfare of a client. Again, allegiances of the professional should
          be clarified. Communication between professionals related to treatment of the child or
                                                                     
          adolescent is critical and should be obtained through parent or guardian consent if the
          youth is under the age of 18. An additional professional relationship concern that may
          arise is related to ethical violations by another psychologist or mental health provider.
          According to the APA (2002, p. 4; Section 1.04) ethics code, “an attempt to resolve the
          issue by the concern should be bringing it to the attention of the individual, if informal
          resolution appears appropriate and intervention does not violate confidentiality rights
          that may be involved.” If an informal resolution is not obtained, further action should
                                                                     
          be taken, such as referral to ethics committees at the state or national level or state
          licensing boards (APA, 2002, p. 4; Section 1.05).          
            Professionals are obligated to practice within the limits of their competence. They
          should recognize the limits of their skills, the techniques they utilize, and the range
          of clinical problems they are equipped to deal with therapeutically. They should func-
          tion within the sphere of their education, training, and professional experiences and
                                                                     
          accurately present their qualifications and backgrounds to clients. In conjunction with
          this ethic, it is incumbent on professionals to participate in continuing education and
          other forms of professional development to maintain and improve their level of com-
          petency. This is particularly relevant for professionals practicing in a school setting,

=== Page 44 (1 cols) ===
30   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      whereexpertiseinalargenumberofareas,suchasautism,attention-deficit/hyperactivity
      disorder (ADHD), preschool mental health, elective or selective mutism, mental health
      issues related to cultural and linguistic diversity, eating disorders, bipolar disorder, and
      self-injurious behaviors such as cutting, is expected. It is critical that school psycholo-
      gists, social workers, and counselors receive specific training in these areas and are famil-
      iar with the research related to a specific problem of a child or adolescent. Although it is
      not realistic to expect professionals to be experts in all areas, especially for professionals
      just beginning their career, requesting ongoing assistance from an expert in a particular
      area, such as autism, or referring the student to another specifically trained professional
      is ethically necessary. If personal problems, personal conflicts, or other factors inter-
      fere with their therapeutic effectiveness and competence, therapists should take steps
      to protect their clients’ welfare. This is particularly important when working with chil-
      dren or adolescents and families from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds.
      It is important for mental health providers to be not only knowledgeable but also aware
      of their limitations. For example, although school psychologists may be knowledgeable
      about Arabic cultures through readings, professional development activities, and so on,
      it does not indicate that they are competent to provide mental health services to the
      student, particularly when other professionals may be able to provide more appropriate
      interventions. Similarly, when working with a student with substance abuse issues, gen-
      eral knowledge of abuse does not indicate the skills needed to be a successful therapist
      for the student unless specific coursework or other education has provided this training.
      When mental health providers are aware that they are not the best service provider for
      a child or adolescent, it is important to explain this clearly to the child and parents or
      guardians and to provide appropriate referral sources.         
        Issues related to public statements and presentations concern the presentation of materi-
      als in advertising, public lectures, and the print and electronic media. Announcements
      of services should present accurate, factual information about professional background
      and services and should avoid testimonials or guarantees. Public presentations about psy-
      chological topics should focus on scientifically accurate information. Therapeutic and
      other professional services should not be conducted in a public forum, but rather in the
      context of a professional relationship.                        
        The proliferation of professionals in private practice presents some provoking prob-
      lems. These practitioners should fully inform their clients about financial requirements
      and considerations in these relationships at the beginning of services. If also employed
      in another institution, it is unethical to use your institutional affiliation to solicit clients.
      For example, school social workers or psychologists who have a private practice in addi-
      tiontoschoolemploymentcannotsolicitclientsfromschoolsinwhichtheyareassigned.
      It is also questionable whether a school employee in private practice should accept
      clients from the school district, which can be particularly problematic in small districts

=== Page 45 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 31
                                                                     
          and communities. In some situations, clients must be informed of services available
          through public institutions (e.g., schools). The APA (2002) ethics code specifically
                                                                     
          defines multiple relationships, which was not done in previous codes, and also states that
          not all multiple relationships are unethical (Standard 3.05). Specifically, according to
          the ethics code (Smith, 2003), psychologists should avoid relationships that could nega-
          tively impact their professional performance or harm/exploit the other person. Multiple
          relationships that are not expected to have these effects are not unethical. It may be
          impossible for a psychologist to completely avoid such relationships, and according to
          Gottlieb’s (2003) reflection about the impact of three factor’s may facilitate identifica-
                                                                     
          tion of unethical multiple relationships. The three factors are:
                                                                     
            1. Power: The power differential between the psychologist and the other person,
              whether it is a therapist/client or supervisor/trainee relationship.
            2. Duration: Is the relationship to be long term or episodic/brief?
            3. Termination: Does the client/parent understand that therapy is terminated or is
                                                                     
              it a chronic problem that requires intermittent therapy over a long time period?
                                                                     
            The latter may preclude any relationship outside of one that is therapeutic in nature.
          A sexual relationship with a client is always an ethical violation. Multiple relationships
          when working with children often involve relationships with parents or guardians, such
          as coaching sports teams or leading Boy or Girl Scout troops. The impact on the ther-
          apeutic relationship with the child through a relationship with family members should
                                                                     
          be paramount in decision making regarding the ethics of a situation. However, it is not
          automatically an ethical violation to participate in activities with your child, such as
          Boy or Girl Scouts, when a client is also on the team. Questions related to the previous
          factors should be asked to clarify a possibly conflictual relationship, and extreme caution
          should be made to avoid personal or treatment conversations outside the therapeutic or
          school setting.                                            
            Ethical violations are classified by the specific principle and section(s) of principles
                                                                     
          found to have been violated. In terms of actual adjudicated complaints, the largest
          numbers of violations involved the principles of dual relationships, adherence to profes-
          sional standards, governmental laws and institutional regulations, and confidentiality.
          The term dual relationships refers to any relationship a psychologist might have with
          a client that might impair professional judgment and/or present the risk of exploita-
          tion. This could include the assessment and treatment of friends, relatives, or employ-
                                                                     
          ees, as well as sexually intimate relationships with clients. The majority of complaints
          in this area dealt with psychologists being sexually involved with their clients. Com-
          plaints regarding adherence to standards, laws, and regulations most often dealt with
          violation of a law or other formal legal (civil or criminal) adjudication. In particular,

=== Page 46 (1 cols) ===
32   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      psychologists have had problems related to fee policies and practices, mostly involving
      fraudulent third-party billing practices. Problems in confidentiality have involved both
      breaking confidentiality in violation of the law and refusing to break confidentiality
      where required by law, as in the case of mandated reporting of child abuse. Failure to
      follow informed consent procedures has posed problems in this area.
        Another area that is of critical ethical importance when working with children and
      adolescentsistheroleoftheparentand/orguardian.JacobandHartshorne (2011)report
      that professional codes of ethics and law are consistent in the area of parental consent
      for youth under the age of 18 when contact with a student is beyond the typical school
      occurrence and may involve personal and family privacy issues. However, provision of
      emergency services, such as suicide assessment or a report of possible abuse, may be
      provided without parental consent (NASP, 2010). However, parent notification imme-
      diately after the student emergency contact is important. The exception would be in
      the case of suspected abuse when a child welfare or protective agency tells the school
      professional not to contact the parent until the student can be interviewed. In the case
      of suicide or threats toward others, parent notification and provision of referral sources
      is critical. Continued therapeutic contact with a student requires parent consent. With
      the incorporation of student assistance teams or prereferral teams at the school level
      as well as response to intervention in the reauthorization of IDEA (Individuals with
      Disabilities Education Improvement Act, 2004), the question of school psychologists’
      participation with students without specific consent of parent or guardian becomes more
      critical. Often, a school psychologist is a member of the intervention team and is an
      integral part of designing prereferral interventions for a child prior to referral for spe-
      cial education consideration. Interventions may range from indirect services to children
      (teacher and/or parent consultation) to direct services such as classroom observations
      with the purpose of developing an intervention plan, often related to behavioral and
      social-emotionalissues,andcounseling.Theobjectiveofthedirectservicesisspecifically
      targeted interventions for a particular child, not the class of students as a whole. Reschly
      and Bersoff (1999) suggest that parental consent is needed and desired if the focus of the
      consultation is a specific student and the outcome of the consultation or intervention is
      that the child may be treated differently from others. Ethically, school psychologists are
      obligated to ensure that replacement behaviors that result from an intervention, coun-
      seling, or consultation are beneficial to the child, not only the classroom teacher, in that
      they assist in developing long-term appropriate self-management skills to replace inap-
      propriate behaviors that interfere with learning and interactions with others (Jacob &
      Hartshorne, 2011). Interventions that have the greatest likelihood of success and that
      are the least drastic procedures with the fewest adverse effects should be selected. When-
      everastudentisreferredtoastudentassistanceteam,duetoteacherconcerns,theparent
      should be informed of the meeting in advance, the purpose of the meeting, and the

=== Page 47 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 33
                                                                     
          concerns specified, as well as given an opportunity to attend the meeting and identify
          theteammembers.Anexplanationofpossibleoutcomes,suchasclassroomobservations,
                                                                     
          development of an intervention plan, and so on, should also be provided. Generally, this
          would be completed by the people making the referral to the student assistance team
          because they would have the most specific information. A formal letter mailed to the
          parent or guardian containing the same information is also considered to be best prac-
          tice, as well as a follow-up telephone contact and letter by a team member specifying
          the interventions. The ethical and legal question arises with respect to school psychol-
          ogists involvement following an intervention team, such as whether parent notification
                                                                     
          of the meeting purpose, possible outcomes, and team members signifies tacit parent con-
          sent or if written parental consent is necessary. Generally, parent concerns will often
          be identified prior to the intervention team meeting when informed of the meeting.
          Written parent consent for participation of a school psychologist in specific student
          interventions is suggested. A telephone contact or meeting with parents following an
          intervention team meeting by the psychologist is necessary to establish a relationship
          with the parents. An exception to this would be when the parent is in attendance at
                                                                     
          the meeting and written permission is obtained at that time. An exception to the need
          for separate parental consent is when psychological interventions, such as counseling,
          collaboration, and so on are written into the student’s individual education plan (IEP).
                                                                     
          Special Considerations with Children and Adolescents       
          There are several ethical considerations with which all individuals in the helping
                                                                     
          professions must be concerned. However, there are also issues that are specific to those
          who provide services to children and adolescents. These issues include client identifi-
          cation (i.e., child, parent/family, agency/school) and concomitant therapist responsi-
          bilities, child and parental rights, confidentiality, and general professional ethics with
          respect to service delivery and retraining.                
                                                                     
          Client Identification                                      
                                                                     
          A major issue confronting child/adolescent therapists is identification of the client,
          whether this is the child, the parent(s), and in the case of educational personnel, the
          school. Ideally, there is minimal if any conflict between the triad or any combina-
          tion of it.                                                
            According to the ethical principles of the ASCA (2014) and NASP (2010), the
          student is the primary client. It is, therefore, the responsibility of the counselor or school
                                                                     
          psychologist to place the needs and rights of the child as the client first. However, it
          cannot always be assumed that professionals are necessarily child advocates or that
          they automatically recommend what is most appropriate for the child (Koocher &
          Keith-Spiegel, 1990). Koocher and Keith-Spiegel further state that a therapist is

=== Page 48 (1 cols) ===
34   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      morally obligated to serve as a child advocate because children cannot serve as their
      own advocate due to psychological and physical immaturity or legal statute.
        In theory, it makes sense that a clinician would relegate the child to the role of client,
      but because it is the child who is being treated, practically and legally the role of the par-
      ent must also be considered. Because parents have legal responsibility for the well-being
      of their children under the age of 18 according to most state statutes, therapists have
      a responsibility to the parents. However, this factor can be confusing and conflictual
      at times for the service provider. Most often, parents are the primary referral agents for
      their child, and children frequently become involved in therapy because of parental
      referral. Although students, particularly those at the elementary school level, do not
      often self-refer for counseling, this practice is becoming more prevalent, particularly for
      school counselors at the secondary level, because many referrals for counseling are now
      student initiated (Jacob & Hartshorne, 2011). This then becomes more of an ethical
      issue for the school psychologist because legal precedents are not known at this time.
      Jacob and Hartshorne (2011) recommend that schools adopt written policies that state
      that students may be seen by school-based mental health professionals without parental
      consent to determine that a child is not a danger to self or others. According to Koocher
      and Keith-Spiegel (1990), therapists infrequently refuse to consider children as a client
      at the onset based on their unwillingness to participate. Therefore, an agreement of
      sorts has been made with the parents, regardless of the child’s wishes, which identifies
      the parent(s) as also having some client characteristics. Parental input is also critical
      to the therapeutic process concerning background information, problem identification,
      and goal setting.                                              
        Koocher and Keith-Spiegel (1990) raise the issue of whether parental rights are
      stymied when a child refuses treatment and a therapist accepts this decision. Several
      factors should be considered by a therapist when making this decision. The NASP
      (2010) code states that school psychologists should make every effort to obtain chil-
      dren’s voluntary participation in therapy, but should also respect their rights. According
      to Johnson, Rasbury, and Siegel (1997), the specific factors to be considered are age,
      level of cognitive development of the child, the child’s degree of disturbance, the degree
      of disturbance noted in the parents, and the degree to which the therapist feels that
      treatment is warranted. The younger the child’s age, the greater the responsibility a
      therapist has to the parents.                                  
        Another potential client is the agency, particularly when counseling a child in
      a school setting. Because many school psychologists, counselors, and social workers
      have been hired by educational agencies to provide therapy and counseling services
      to children in the schools, they have subsequent employer responsibilities. According

=== Page 49 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 35
                                                                     
          to Huey (1986), acceptance of a position in an educational setting implies general
          agreement with the institution’s objectives and principles. He further states that a
                                                                     
          mental health provider should not be perceived as more concerned with school rules
          than child rights, but rather with seeking solutions to protect these rights in addition
          to advocating for school policies to further them. Parental rights are seen as a third part
          of the triad of child and school, in which a cooperative relationship among the three
          is critical, albeit difficult, conflictual, and ambiguous at times. However, Huey (1986)
          sees ambiguity and ethical conflicts among the triad components as an inherent part of
          the school counselor or psychologist’s role. It is a role that requires professional decision
                                                                     
          making based on ethical values and legal restraints in conjunction with a willingness to
          accept responsibility for judgments made concerning a child.
                                                                     
          Child and Parental Rights                                  
          The majority of the literature that discusses child and parental rights emphasizes that
          both are to be considered clients, but that it is the primary responsibility of the ther-
                                                                     
          apist to protect the rights of the child (Koocher & Keith-Siegel, 1990; NASP, 2010).
          This statement of ethical values provides what on the surface is an appropriate goal. In
          reality, however, it is not necessarily easily obtained or specific. According to Jacob and
          Hartshorne (2011), when a child is enrolled in an educational setting, legally, parents
          need to provide informed consent for psychological services. However, when allowing a
          student the opportunity to participate in counseling or to refuse services, several factors
          need to be considered, such as legal precedents, ethical factors, and the student’s compe-
                                                                     
          tency in decision making (i.e., level of cognitive abilities, social-emotional functioning).
          When protecting the rights of parents and children, the therapist must be careful not
          to allow personal beliefs to interfere, but rather to assist clients in making appropri-
          ate decisions (Huey, 1986). At times, particularly with respect to school-aged students,
          the client is both the student and the parent or guardian and it is critical to clearly
          explaintheparametersofconfidentiality.Whenastudentisseeninaschoolsetting,con-
          fidentiality also concerns the information that is shared with teachers and other school
                                                                     
          personnel. Both students and parents should be clearly informed about confidentiality.
          Although parent permission for ongoing services provided by a school psychologist is
          needed, Remley and Herlihy (2001) state that school counselors are able to provide
          counseling services to students without parental permission when there are no federal
          or state laws specifically prohibiting this. However, Welfel (2002) suggests that ethically
          school counselors should obtain both student and parent permission when counseling
                                                                     
          is likely to involve several sessions. School counselors, as well as school psychologists,
          have ethical obligations to uphold both parental and student rights.

=== Page 50 (1 cols) ===
36   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        Over time, authors in the ethics literature (Huey, 1986; Jacob & Hartshorne, 2011;
      Koocher & Keith-Siegel, 1990; Ross, 1980; Simmonds, 1976) describe key rights for
      children and parents, as summarized in the following:          
      Children in Therapy Have the Right:                            
         • To be informed about the evaluation process and reasons and results in under-
           standable terms.                                          
         • To be informed about therapeutic interventions and rationale in understandable
           terms.                                                    
         • To be informed about confidentiality and its limitations. 
         • To control release of information.                        
         • Not to be involved in therapy if uncomfortable or unsuccessful (this is not always
           possible when it is mandated by court order or IEP).      
         • To be treated with respect and told the truth.            
         • To participate with the therapist and/or parent(s) in decision making and goal
           setting.                                                  
         • Not to be labeled the scapegoat in a dysfunctional family.
      Parents’ Rights and Responsibilities Include:                  
         • The legal responsibility to provide for their child’s welfare.
         • The right to access to information (educational, medical, therapeutic) that per-
           tains to their child’s welfare.                           
         • The right to seek therapy and/or treatment services for their child.
         • The right to be involved in therapeutic decision making and goal setting for
           their child.                                              
         • The right to give permission for treatments.              
         • The right to release confidential information concerning their child.
                                                                     
                                                                     
        It is evident from these lists of child and parental rights that there is overlap and inter-
      face between the two. The parental rights mentioned are for the most part also legal
      rights, unless legal guardianship has been removed by the courts. However, several of
      the child’s rights are ethical values and not mandated or dictated by law. The previously
      cited authors have presented these recommendations to protect a child’s rights during
      counseling or therapeutic interventions. A professional must make decisions and rec-
      ommendations, particularly where the child’s rights are concerned, depending on the
                                                                     
      variables of age and so on, as mentioned earlier.              
        A factor in child rights that bears ethical consideration involves children referred
      for therapy when the family is the presenting problem. For example, a child is referred
      for counseling and identified by his parents as “problematic,” whereas interviews and

=== Page 51 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 37
                                                                     
          so on reveal a family or parental dysfunction that would warrant a family counseling
          or systems approach. Children may be labeled as dysfunctional for insurance purposes
                                                                     
          because they have no recourse or legal rights, but these reports may become detrimental
          to the student in the future. Additionally, a conflict in values may arise between parent
          and child over a treatment goal based on a parental request although the behavior causes
          no personal difficulties for the child. Ethically, the goal would be for the mental health
          provider to work with both parents and child to reach a mutual decision plan, although
          the needs of the student should be primary to the psychologist (NASP, 2010). These
          rights for children and parents are again going to be affected by the situation and clients.
                                                                     
          Professional decisions will vary from client to client as a therapist strives to protect both
          child’s and parents’ rights, while advocating for the child.
                                                                     
          Confidentiality                                            
          Another ethical issue that regularly confronts therapists both in private practice or
          agency/school settings is confidentiality. All professional ethical guidelines for the var-
                                                                     
          ious helping professions address the topic of confidentiality (ACA, 2014; APA, 2010;
          ASCA, 2010; NASP, 2010; NASW, 2008). The APA (2002) guidelines state that client
          information is confidential unless the client gives permission to reveal or discuss it. How-
          ever, as Johnson et al. (1997) note, it is common for professionals to share reports on
          children with other professionals involved with the child, such as teachers, private psy-
          chologists, and counselors. This is done with the permission of the child’s parent or legal
          guardian, rather than the child. It appears that the child’s permission to share this infor-
                                                                     
          mation should ethically be obtained as a matter of routine. According to Glossoff and
          Pate (2002), elementary school counselors, are more likely to share confidential infor-
          mation than secondary counselors, based on information obtained in a study by Isaacs
          and Stone (1999). Glossoff and Pate (2002) state this fits with using a developmental
          framework that indicates that younger children are less able to make informed choices
          and are less concerned about confidentiality than older students. However, regardless of
                                                                     
          a student’s age, both legal statutes and professional ethical guidelines indicate the neces-
          sity to report to the parents if a child is engaging in behaviors that are a danger to self or
          others or relates plansto carry out suchactionsand any suspected instancesof abuse. The
          idea that danger to self or others supersedes a client’s right to privacy and confidential-
          ity is an accepted part of ethical and legal professions. However, the definition of what
          constitutes danger can be difficult to ascertain depending on the age or developmental
          level of a student. Findings of a 1999 study by Isaacs and Stone found that most school
                                                                     
          counselorsagreethatdrugexperimentationbyan8-year-oldwouldrequireparentalnoti-
          fication. However, there was less agreement about informing parents if a 16-year-old
          student reported some experimentation with marijuana. The impact of a mental health
          provider’s personal values may also influence decision making. All instances of suspected

=== Page 52 (1 cols) ===
38   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      child abuse (physical, emotional, sexual) and neglect must be reported to a child abuse
      hotline or designated social services agency. It is possible for ethical and legal factors
      to conflict in this area, when a child may not speak to a mental health provider due to
      fear of parental retaliation or removal from the home. However, the law is clear that all
      school-based personnel are mandated to report any suspected abuse. Ethically, the men-
      tal health provider should inform the student at the beginning of a counseling session or
      conversation what types of information must be reported to parents or other agencies.
      In Phyllis P. v. Claremont Unified School District (1986), the California Supreme Court
      ruled that a school district had a mandatory duty to warn a student’s parent that a child
      was being sexually molested, a duty to report the assaults to a child protective agency,
      the necessity to obtain written parent consent prior to psychological treatment, as well
      as a duty to ensure the student’s safety and to supervise the offender.
        There are also legal limitations to confidentiality such as the Family Educational
      Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) and court-ordered evaluation and/or counseling, as
      well as release of records. In these situations, information obtained specifically must be
      available to parents or judicial or social services personnel. The APA (2002) guidelines
      (Standards 9.04 and 9.11) have eliminated the prohibition to releasing test data, such
      as protocols to persons who are not trained in interpretation. Without written client or
      parent/guardian consent, this data is released only as required by state law or court order
      (Smith, 2003). The 2002 guidelines also include specific definitions of test data as “raw
      and scaled scores, client/patient responses to test questions or stimuli, and psychologists’
      notes and recordings concerning client/patient statements and behavior during exami-
      nation” in addition to “portions of test materials that include client/patient responses.”
      Test materials are defined as “manuals, instruments, protocols and the test questions or
      stimuli” excluding test data (APA, 2002, p. 14; Section 9.11). Additional confidential-
      ity issues, which are less specifically defined, such as those that occur during individual
      or group counseling, should also be considered by mental health providers. Because par-
      ents, as a child’s legal guardian, in many states have access to therapy records, it seems
      logical to search for a level of communication that is acceptable to both parents and the
      child. For example, a child should be told initially in therapy what information will be
      shared with parents (i.e., statements of a suicidal nature or those that involve danger to
      others) without the child’s permission. Johnson et al. (1997) recommend that therapists
      seek a balance between a child’s and parents’ rights, such as discussing general topics
      that arise during therapy but not the specific details.        
        Counseling provided in a group setting also involves protection of a child’s rights
      of confidentiality (Jacob & Hartshorne, 2011). The APA (2002) guidelines state that
      psychologists who provide group counseling or therapy explain in the beginning ses-
      sion both the roles and responsibilities of the mental health provider and group mem-
      bers and the parameters of confidentiality (Smith, 2003). It is suggested that the term

=== Page 53 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 39
                                                                     
          confidentiality be explained to the children and adolescents at the onset of the counseling
          session in understandable terms (i.e., “You may talk to others about topics discussed, but
                                                                     
          not use the names of other group members”). Problems of breaking the confidentiality
          agreement can be decided by group members. Groups in school settings may be par-
          ticularly prone to difficulties with breaking confidentiality. Although confidentiality is
          designed to protect the child’s privacy, acceptable compromises are not always available.
          Therapists may find they must sometimes make decisions that alienate or upset either
          the child/client or parent.                                
            An additional area related to confidentiality involves the use of the Internet elec-
                                                                     
          tronic transmission of materials, such as reports and so on (Smith, 2003). The APA
          (2002) ethical guidelines state in Standard 4.02 that psychologists who offer services,
          products, or information through the use of faxes or e-mail must inform their clients of
          the risks to privacy and confidentiality.                  
                                                                     
          Professional Ethical Responsibilities                      
                                                                     
          In addition to ethical considerations that are primarily concerned with child and
          parental rights, a major issue pertaining to the service provider is professional compe-
          tence or expertise in the areas of treatment to be provided. For example, a therapist
          trained in adult psychopathology should not ethically treat children or vice versa,
          without specific training. According to Johnson et al. (1997), general training in
          one of the mental health disciplines (i.e., clinical/counseling psychology, psychiatry,
          social work) does not necessarily qualify a therapist to offer psychological services to
                                                                     
          children. Some training programs may not provide either discrete didactic and clinical
          experiences in working with children and adolescents. Professional ethics would
          warrant a referral to another appropriately trained therapist under these circumstances.
          This area is also addressed in the ethical guidelines for all earlier mentioned mental
          health organizations.                                      
            A related concern involves obtaining a second professional opinion in situations
                                                                     
          where a treatment recommendation is controversial (i.e., aversive treatment) or
          unacceptable to parents (Koocher & Keith-Spiegel, 1990). According to APA (2002)
          guidelines, parents and child/adolescent clients must be informed if a treatment is
          considered experimental (Standard 10.01b). This should include a description of
          the intervention or treatment, possible risks, alternative treatments, and voluntary
          participation (Smith, 2003). Parents and students must also be informed if the mental
          health provider is an intern or practicum student at the beginning of the provision of
                                                                     
          services and if they will be discussing the case with a supervisor (Jacob & Hartshorne,
          2011). Additionally, continuing education and professional growth and development
          are also ethically critical, particularly to ensure that a therapist is providing up-to-date
          treatment and therapy recommendations for a child.

=== Page 54 (1 cols) ===
40   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      RECENT  ISSUES IN WORKING WITH CHILDREN                        
      AND  ADOLESCENTS                                               
      There are several areas that, although they have always existed in mental health
      and school settings, have become more prevalent and/or frequently discussed in the
      professional literature as they pertain to children and adolescents. The areas are use of
      interpreters, interventions with culturally and linguistically diverse populations, issues
      of school violence (i.e., threats to a specific person, persons, or school building; pos-
      session of weapons), suicide, substance abuse, pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases
      and/or birth control, and discussion of psychopharmacology with students and parents.
      Several of these issues also overlap with legal precedents and state or federal laws.
        The APA 2002, ASCA 2010, ACA 2014, and NASP 2010 ethical guidelines empha-
      size the importance of knowledge and application of empirically supported interventions
      and assessment procedures when working with students and families from culturally and
      linguistically diverse backgrounds. As previously mentioned, practitioner knowledge of
      a student and family’s culture (e.g., values, beliefs) and how they may impact learning,
      behavior, and acculturation is critical (Jacobsen & Hartshorne, 2011; Ortiz & Flana-
      gan, 2002; Rhodes, Ochoa, & Ortiz, 2005). Additionally, awareness of the practitioner’s
      cultural background, gender, class, racial or ethnic identity, sexual orientation and per-
      sonal values, and prejudices and beliefs must also be personally examined to understand
      any impact on working with students from culturally and linguistically diverse back-
      grounds (Hansen, Pepitone-Arreola-Rockwell, & Greene, 2000). The therapist needs
      understanding and respect for other cultural and experiential backgrounds and has the
      responsibility to select empirically supported interventions that are appropriate for stu-
      dents from diverse backgrounds and also assist parents and students to better understand
      the culture of the school and community (Hays, 2001). When working with students
      and families from diverse backgrounds, a critical factor is the practitioners awareness of
      personal limitations that may invalidate the evaluation or intervention (Hansen et al.,
      2000; NASW, 2008), such as lack of knowledge of the language, personal views, lack
      of necessary knowledge of the culture or previous experiences (e.g., refugees) and the
      impact on learning or socialization. Given the rapidly increasing cultural and linguistic
      diversity throughout the country and the lack of trained mental health professionals, it is
      criticalthatmentalhealthprovidersengageinprofessionaldevelopmentandcontinuing
      education in this area and seek out appropriate referral resources. The use of inter-
      preters is often necessary with children, adolescents, and parents who are not proficient
      in English. However, both the 2002 APA and the 2010 NASP guidelines emphasize
                                                                     
      the use of interpreters. Specifically, APA 2002 Standard 2.05 states that psychologists
      should attempt to avoid the use of interpreters who have a relationship with the client
      (e.g., sibling, relative) and ensure that the interpreter is competent. Fluency in both the

=== Page 55 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 41
                                                                     
          language of the student and family and English is important. Informed consent for use
          of an interpreter is also necessary to document the limitations of test results with respect
                                                                     
          to cultural and linguistic diversity and ensure confidentiality of the interpreter (APA,
          2002; Standard 9.03).                                      
            Violence toward others by school-aged children and adolescents is a primary area
          of concern. Recent news reports and newspaper articles report an increase in violent
          crimes by progressively younger and younger children, and history has recorded the
          occurrences of school violence through shootings in Kentucky, Oregon, Minnesota, and
          most famously, Columbine, Colorado. Although schools are in theory the safest places
                                                                     
          for children (Mulvey & Cauffman, 2001), concerns about school violence and identi-
          fication of students who may be at risk for violent acts and prevention programs are of
          prime importance. Jacob and Hartshorne (2011) state that while schools have a legal
          responsibility under federal, state, and case laws to protect students from harm, ther-
          apists also must take reasonable steps to prevent possible harm when their client is a
          threat to others (Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California, 1976). Although ethi-
                                                                     
          cally mental health providers have a mandate to report, it is difficult to determine, when
          students have a history of aggression, whether they are likely to commit future acts of
          violence and how to prevent such acts. Borum (2000) advocates that practitioners use
          a student’s history of violent acts, the antecedents to the acts, and protective factors
          (e.g., What would help a student avoid a situation that can trigger aggressive actions?)
          in working preventatively with a student. However, when a student is referred to a men-
          tal health provider due to targeted violence, both the perpetrator and potential victim
                                                                     
          must be identified prior to the violent incident (Jacob & Hartshorne, 2011). Consulta-
          tion with other mental health professionals is recommended (Waldo & Malley, 1992)
          when making the determination of a risk for violence. Parental notification that their
          child is a potential target is important for students, particularly for minor children, but
          in addition the therapist needs to inform the parents of the possible perpetrator. Knowl-
          edge of community referral sources for the family is important. Legal precedents related
          to school violence will be presented later in the chapter. 
                                                                     
            Suicide, according to the Centers for Disease Control (2012), is in the top three
          causes of death for adolescents. As previously mentioned, mental health practitioners in
          private practice, community, and school settings are ethically bound to report suicidal
          ideations or attempts to parents. Poland (1989) noted that although parent notification
          isnecessary,informingtheparentsinamannerthatissupportiveandthatwillelicittheir
          positive reactions or responses is critical. A parental signature documenting that they
                                                                     
          were informed about their child’s suicidal threats or attempts is recommended, along
          with suggestions for home (e.g., supervision needs, removal of access to weapons) and
          community referral sources for further evaluation and therapy. Ethically, simply inform-
          ingaparentaboutastudent’ssuicidalthreatsisnotsufficient.Stepstoensurethesafetyof

=== Page 56 (1 cols) ===
42   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      the student such as those just mentioned are necessary. Poland (1989) recommends that
      social services be contacted for possible neglect charges if the parents refuse to follow
      through on treatment recommendations.                          
        With the well-documented increase in the use of medications with children and ado-
      lescents through research articles and the media, another ethical area for mental health
      providers, particularly those in school settings, is related to discussing possible medica-
      tion use with parents and informing parents when their child is not taking medication.
      The latter is a particularly difficult ethical area for practitioners because the behavior
      may not be immediately dangerous and decision making about parent informing should
      be based on factors related to the student’s age, ability to make informed judgments,
      and harm to self as a result of discontinuation of the medication. Discussions with the
      student about concerns related to the risk-taking behavior and knowledge of state and
      school regulations are important.                              
        Areas related to sexuality (e.g., birth control, sexually transmitted diseases, abortion),
      although legally dictated in some states and through school policies in others, present
      ethical dilemmas for a mental health provider, particularly those who are school-based.
      These areas are controversial and personally value-based. It is important that practition-
      ers who work with adolescents be knowledgeable about school policies as well as state
      statutes with respect to referrals, provision of information, parental notification, and so
      on. Ethically, the mental health provider may be placed in the situation where informa-
      tionthatisrequested(e.g.,referralforanabortion)isagainstschoolpolicy.Knowledgeof
      communityresourcesthatpresentafairpresentationofalternativesforstudentsisimpor-
      tant. Additionally,it is important that professionals be aware of their personal values and
      separate them from those of the client. Knowledge of and referral to appropriate com-
      munity physicians and family planning or health clinics is necessary for mental health
      practitioners working with adolescents.                        
      LEGAL  ISSUES                                                  
                                                                     
      As previously mentioned, there is often overlap between legal and ethical aspects related
      to the provision of mental health services to children and adolescents. Generally, when
      legal statutes exist, mental health practitioners follow them, as indicated by professional
      organization codes of conduct and ethics. In our increasingly litigious society, a wider
      range of cases are decided by the courts, including those related to school policies and
      procedures, mental health services, instruction, and medication use. Although there are
                                                                     
      legal statutes and decisions that have clarified some aspects of provision of service to
      children, specifically related to parental notification or rights and unbiased assessment,
      others are recent decisions, such as those related to school violence. It is imperative that

=== Page 57 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 43
                                                                     
          mental health providers continue to review state and federal statutes as well as court
          decisions as they impact services to children and adolescents.
                                                                     
          Relevant Case Law                                          
                                                                     
          Three rather broad and interrelated domains of law are discussed in this section as they
          apply to interventions: (1) confidentiality and privileged communication, (2) informed
          consent, and (3) access to records.                        
                                                                     
          Confidentiality and Privileged Communication               
                                                                     
          Although frequently used interchangeably, important distinctions exist between the
          legal concepts of confidentiality and privileged communication. Confidentiality refers
          to a general obligation of a professional to avoid disclosing information regarding
          the relationship with a client to any third party (Bersoff, 2003) and includes “more
          broadly the legal rules and ethical standards that protect an individual from unau-
          thorized disclosure of information” (p. 159). Privileged communication is narrower
                                                                     
          in scope than confidentiality. As Jagim, Wittman, and Noll (1978) note, “Whereas
          confidentiality concerns matters of communication outside the courtroom, privilege
          protects clients from disclosure in judicial proceedings” (p. 459). Thus, although an
          obligation to preserve confidentiality constitutes a broad duty owed by a professional to
          a client, “Psychotherapist-patient privilege is a rule of evidence relevant only in court
          proceedings” (Hulteng & Goldman, 1987, p. 239).            
                                                                     
            Thedoctrineofprivilegedcommunicationhaspartially,butnotcompletely,protected
          a client’s right to privacy in that confidential information can be withheld in a court if
          it is identified as privileged communication (Bersoff, 2003). Bersoff further states that
          in order for information to be considered confidential, four requirements must be met:
                                                                     
            1. Communications must be to a licensed or certified therapist as described in the
              state’s statute.                                       
                                                                     
            2. A professional relationship must exist between the client and therapist.
            3. Information must be related to the provision of professional services.
            4. Communications must be confidential and not released to a third party.
                                                                     
            The notion of a special relationship forms the basis of privilege as it applies to
          disclosures in the courtroom. The laws of various states ultimately govern the scope of
          privileged communication but may include husband-wife, attorney-client, member of
                                                                     
          clergy-penitent, and physician-patient relationships (Fischer & Sorenson, 1996). Most
          psychologists have privileged communications from disclosure of psychologist-client
          communications that are privileged from disclosure in court in 41 states. All 50 states

=== Page 58 (1 cols) ===
44   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      have regulations that apply for school counselors (Herlihy & Sheeley, 1986) although
      the specifics and nature of the privileged communication statutes vary from state to
      state. Professionals need to be aware of the specific privileges, limits, and exceptions
      associated with their licenses and certifications in their state statutes. For example,
      some states limit privileged communication to drug and alcohol issues. In some cases,
      the statutes change for students at different ages. And some professionals may hold
      dual credentials (e.g., certified as a school psychologist through the state department
      of education as well as being a licensed psychologist for independent practice by the
      state psychology board). The professional’s rights may vary depending on certification
      and licensure, as well as the setting of their work with clients. Bersoff (2003) states
      that the concepts of privilege and confidentiality have become “increasingly subject to
      exceptions and limitations,                                    
                       …                                             
                         by inconsistent federal and state rules and threatened by
      changes in health-care financing” (p. 160). Even in states that have statutes regarding
      privilege, this right is typically granted to clients of psychologists—not psychologists
      themselves. Because the right to assert or waive the privilege to prevent disclosure in
      courtroom proceedings is granted to the client, issues of competency are often involved.
      Typically, the child mental health practitioner’s client is a minor and is, therefore,
      considered legally incompetent to exercise the privilege. Although children ethically
      have the same rights to confidentiality as adults, legally this is not true. Parents,
      with minimal exceptions, have the legal right to control mental health services for
      their child and to be involved in the planning (Birdsall & Hubert, 2000). Waiving of
      psychologist-client confidentiality can also reduce the scope of privilege (Bersoff, 2003).
        In states protecting the relationship between clients and psychologists, the term
      psychologist usually refers to those who have been licensed, registered, or certified by
      a state board of examiners or similar body for the purpose of regulating the public
      and private practice of psychology. This, for example, frequently excludes “school
      psychologists” or others using similar titles, but who are not licensed. Jacob and
      Hartshorne (2003) note that it is important that school psychologists recognize that
      the courts view their professional credentials differently than a licensed psychologist
      who works in a non-school setting.                             
        School-based professionals should note that once information is included in a school
      file,itcannotbeconsideredpotentiallyprivilegedcommunicationbut,infact,fallsunder
      the provisions of FERPA, which governs access and privacy. Privileged communication
      statutes, even when they do exist, do not represent absolute guarantees. Even when
      there is statutory support, extenuating circumstances could include client request, and
      clear and imminent danger to the client or others (Herlihy & Sheeley, 1986). Infor-
      mation contained in a student’s due process file, under the Individuals with Disabilities
      Improvement Education Act (IDEIA; 2004), while released only with written parent

=== Page 59 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 45
                                                                     
          consent, is also not generally considered privileged information because it is accessible
          to school personnel.                                       
                                                                     
            AsFischerandSorenson(1996)note,caselawinthisareahasarelativelylonghistory,
          but even in long-recognized exemptions, such as attorney-client relationships, courts
          have demanded that certain conditions be met. The courts have generally held that
          mental health professionals have a common-law obligation to protect the confidential-
          ity of the relationship with a client (Hulteng & Goldman, 1987). Across a number of
          decisions, it appears that the following are three minimal conditions to establish for
          privilege and confidentiality:                             
                                                                     
            1. One party in the relationship must be legally certified as a lawyer, doctor,
                                                                     
              psychologist, counselor, social worker, or minister.   
            2. At the time of the communication in question, he or she must have been acting
              in a professional capacity.                            
            3. The person making the communication, if in possession of his or her faculties,
              must have regarded the professional person as his or her lawyer, doctor, psychol-
              ogist, counselor, social worker, or minister.          
                                                                     
            Another exception to client confidentiality is related to the “duty to warn principle”
          that presents the confidential relationship of a professional and client when threats
                                                                     
          towardothershavebeenmade.Thiswasdecidedinthelandmarkandwell-knowncasein
          1976, Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California. The Tarasoff case revolved around
          a suit filed by the parents of Tatiana Tarasoff, who was killed in 1969 by the patient of
          a University of California hospital psychologist. Two months prior to her death, during
          therapy sessions with the psychologist, the patient had confided his intention to kill
          Ms. Tarasoff. The Tarasoffs’ suit claimed that there was a “duty to warn” their daugh-
          ter of the impending danger. Although the psychologist notified the campus police, the
                                                                     
          California Supreme Court ruled that the psychologist did indeed have a duty to warn
          a known, intended victim directly. The court held that a special relationship existed
          between any therapist and patient and that the duty arising from the therapist’s knowl-
          edge that his patient posed a serious threat of violence meant reasonable care must be
          taken to protect a foreseeable victim of potential violence (George, 1985). To breach a
          potentially dangerous client’s confidentiality, three requirements must be met:
                                                                     
            1. The information must be communicated directly to the therapist.
            2. Serious threat of physical harm is imminent based on an evaluation for serious
              threat to harm.                                        
                                                                     
            3. The potential victim can be reasonably identified by the mental health
              professional.

=== Page 60 (1 cols) ===
46   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        TheCaliforniaSupremeCourtalsostatedthatthefollowingbecompletedwhenthese
      three requirements are met:                                    
         1. Notify the potential victims.                            
         2. Notify the authorities.                                  
         3. Take steps to prevent the threatened danger (Harmell, 2005).
        Individual states have laws relating to Tarasoff with which mental health providers
      should become familiar. In 1994, another case related to Tarasoff was also tried in the
      California Appellate court (Gross v. Allen, 22Cal. App. 4th 354). This case involved
      a university student who was adamant about admission to an inpatient eating disorders
      clinic after gaining weight due to prolixin injections. She was given the medication
      through injection rather than orally since she was seriously suicidal and had previously
      overdosed on medications, in addition to other suicide attempts through various means.
      Her psychiatrist “forbade” her to enter the program, stating that it was inappropriate
      given her current suicidal ideations and previous attempts. She attempted to gain admis-
      sion to the program through a meeting with the program director. He then contacted
      her psychiatrist at the university, who did not inform the program director of her severe
      suicidal behavior, although he stated that he had extreme objections to the appropriate-
      ness of the program. The patient was admitted and overdosed on prolixin tabs that she
      had been hiding and was left with permanent brain damage after 5 weeks in a coma. The
      mother sued the hospital, which cross-sued the university, and she won settlements from
      both. The appellate court ruled that there is a duty to inform serious threats or known
      dangers to a patient’s caregivers when the patient is a danger to herself. According to
      C. Meyer (1997), this ruling is a duty to inform rather than a duty to warn. Ethically,
      mental health professionals must be careful when sharing information about a suici-
      dal patient without consent (Harmell, 2005). Another court ruling related to Tarasoff,
      Bellah v. Greenson (1978), was heard by a California appellate court and involved a
      young adult patient who was suicidal and had a significant substance abuse problem and
                                                                     
      the psychiatrist did not inform her parents. She overdosed and her parents sued with
      the intent of extending Tarasoff to include duty to warn of suicide. Although, accord-
      ing to Harmell (2005), it appeared that the three requirements of Tarasoff were met,
      the court did not extend the previous ruling to include suicide and there have been
      no subsequent court rulings that extended Tarasoff to include suicide. C. Meyer (1997)
      reported that in a reanalysis of Bellah it appears that the reason that is was not extended
                                                                     
      to include suicide is that the statute of limitations had expired in which to file the case.
      In 2004, another addition to the Tarasoff case was tried in a California appellate court,
      Ewing v. Goldstein. The case involved a marriage and family therapist who was treating
      a client for 4 years for work-related problems and a relationship breakup. After learning

=== Page 61 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 47
                                                                     
          of his previous girlfriend’s involvement with another man, he became more depressed
          and reported suicidal ideations, although he was not actively suicidal. Hospitalization
                                                                     
          was discussed and permission was obtained to speak to the client’s father. The client
          subsequently reported severe depression to his parents related to his girlfriend’s new
          relationship and was resentful toward the man and was considering doing harm to him.
          Hospitalization was arranged after communication between the client’s father and ther-
          apist. He was admitted one evening and discharged the next morning with no contact
          between the admitting psychiatrist and the therapist, until the therapist contacted the
          physician and urged him to keep the patient hospitalized. However, the hospital dis-
                                                                     
          charged the client that morning and he killed the new boyfriend and then committed
          suicide the next day. The boyfriend’s parents sued the therapist for wrongful death based
          on professional negligence (i.e., failure to warn their son or a law enforcement of immi-
          nent danger). The therapist argued that he was not directly informed of the threat by
          the client, but by his father and that he had not been told the boyfriend’s surname. The
          court ruled against the parents, but on appeal it was decided “that communication from a
                                                                     
          family member to the patient’s therapist for the purpose of advancing the patient’s ther-
          apy, is a patient communication” (Harmell, 2005, p. 18). A mental health provider’s
          duty to warn a victim occurs if the information provided to the therapist leads to a belief
          that the client is a serious risk of bodily injury to another. Although the Tarasoff case
          and other related cases did not involve school-based mental health professionals, the
          implications for duty to warn and inform seem applicable, particularly when minor chil-
          dren are involved, particularly with respect to school-based violence. Student threats
                                                                     
          to injure others need to be taken seriously based on Miranda v. Board of Education of
          the City of New York (1994). Another legal decision in 2000, Milligan et al. v. City of
          Slidell, ruled that school personnel and police can legally detain and question a student
          thought to be planning a violent act at the school. The school’s interest in preventing
          violence was reported to outweigh the student’s Fourth Amendment rights to privacy
          (Jacob & Hartshorne, 2011). Given the Ewing v. Goldstein decision, it is unclear how far
          the chain of communication will obligate professionals to take Tarasoff-like actions. For
                                                                     
          example, if a teacher communicates a child’s threats to a psychologist, does this obligate
          the psychologist to take appropriate action?               
            Legal decisions related to suicidal ideations reported to school personnel were made
          in Kelson v. City of Springfield (1985) and Eisel v. Board of Education (1991). Decisions
          in both cases, in addition to others, suggest that schools should develop clear suicide
          prevention policies and procedures that include parental notification and appropriate
                                                                     
          staff training (Jacob & Hartshorne, 2003). Failure to communicate with parents (i.e.,
          Eisel case) about possible suicidal ideation and appropriateness of school policies (e.g.,
          lack of suicide prevention training) and the death of a student (i.e., Kelson), indicate
          the court’s view of the school’s role in the duty to warn or inform.

=== Page 62 (1 cols) ===
48   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        The importance and legal mandates to report suspected child abuse has been docu-
      mented in the California court case, Phyllis P. v. Claremont Unified School District (1986),
      where the state supreme court held that a principal, teacher, and school psychologist
      failed to comply with their duty to warn the mother of an 8-year-old girl that her daugh-
      ter was being sexually molested by another student at the school. The student, Phyllis P.,
      statedtoherteacherthatanotherstudentwas“playinggames”withher.Theteachertold
      the school psychologist, and the school psychologist initiated counseling. The principal
      was also aware of the situation. The court noted that the school not only failed to notify
      the mother that the assaults were taking place but also neglected to obtain informed
      consent for treatment and did not properly supervise the molesting student. Addition-
      ally, the court held that the mother could sue the district for this failure to warn. In
      another case (Pesce v. J. Sterling Morton High School District 201, 1987), the courts ruled
      that a school psychologist could be disciplined for misconduct for failure to report child
      abuse in a timely manner.                                      
        Confidentiality and privileged communication are two distinct concepts and should
      not be used interchangeably. Though emerging case law supports a common-law obli-
      gation to preserve confidentiality, it is largely an ethical consideration. Privilege, alter-
      natively, deals with the admissibility of evidence into court. Although various states
      have enacted statutes that grant these exceptions beyond the historical relationships
      (e.g., lawyer-client, minister-penitent) to psychologist-client, some professionals may
      nonetheless have a legal duty to testify if ordered by a court (Fischer & Sorenson, 1996).
      Refusal to do so may lead to contempt citations, fines, or jail terms. Moreover, the priv-
      ilege belongs to the client and not the therapist.             
        The Tarasoff case and other similar cases (e.g., Hedlund v. Superior Court, 1983) have
      caused considerable furor among mental health professionals. In tempering the paranoia
      generated by these cases, George (1985) states, “the determinative question remains
      whether the professional person failed to exercise that reasonable degree of skill, knowl-
      edge, and care ordinarily possessed and exercised by members of that professional spe-
      cialty under similar circumstances” (p. 294). Although the controversy remains, several
      state legislatures have enacted laws that limit the potential liability to some degree. It is
      perhaps safest to assume that professionals have a duty to warn known intended victims
      of their client’s violent intent (Fischer & Sorenson, 1996).   
        In circumstances where a client expresses violent or harmful intentions toward
      another individual, a therapist has the duty to warn potential victims who are the
      targets of such threats. Further, professionals may not only have the duty to warn but
      also infer the duty to protect third parties from violent acts (Mills, 1985). It is also
      clear that most professionals are “mandated reporters” for suspected cases of child
      abuse discovered in the course of their practice. Failure to report as required by state
      statute can result in both civil and criminal liability (Hulteng & Goldman, 1987).

=== Page 63 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 49
                                                                     
          All 50 states have passed legislation that requires school personnel to report suspected
          cases of child abuse (Jacob & Hartshorne, 2011). It is important to note that the law
                                                                     
          does not state that the school personnel reports abuse not only when documented but
          also when suspected, and the child protective agency determines whether abuse has
          occurred (State v. Grover, 1989). Immunity from prosecution in civil and criminal cases
          is provided when reports are made in “good faith.”         
            The information contained in case law decisions indicates that the duty to report/
          warn/inform is a critical aspect of provision of mental health services to children
          (whether it involves reporting suspected cases of child abuse in a timely manner to
                                                                     
          child protective services or informing parents of acts of abuse or aggression that have
          been made toward their child as well as suicidal or violent ideations toward self or
          others), including the duty to warn a potential victim and law enforcement authorities.
          The premise of “do no harm” relates not only to the client, but also to others who may
          be impacted by the client’s behavior.                      
                                                                     
          Informed Consent                                           
                                                                     
          The term informed consent refers to the “receipt of specific permission to do something
          following a complete explanation of the nature, purpose and potential risks involved”
          (DeMers, 1986, p. 45). Informed consent is defined legally as involving three aspects:
          (1) knowledge, (2) competence or intelligence, and (3) voluntariness (Arambula,
          DeKraai, & Sales, 1993; DeMers, 1986; Grisso & Vierling, 1978). Under the strictest
          of interpretations, the knowledge test requires that a professional fully inform the
                                                                     
          student/client/parent of all relevant information about a specific intervention approach
          so that the person becomes “aware” of what is being consented to. The intelligence or
          competence aspect of consent focuses on the ability of the child or parent to arrive at
          the consent rationally and independently. The idea that a student’s ability to make an
          informed decision changes from one day at age 17 to another when he is 18 years of age
          is not logical. In this concept are the notions of cognitive capacity and other mental
                                                                     
          health-related abilities of a child or adolescent. Informed consent, according to Jacob
          and Hartshorne (2011), includes issues such as consent for experimental treatments,
          student self-referrals, and supervision and consultation consent. As previously men-
          tioned, it is the mental health provider’s responsibility to clearly inform the client (child
          or adolescent) and parents about not only the treatment plan and its effectiveness but
          also the experimental nature of any intervention. Ultimately, parents are the legal
          decision makers for their minor child. Parents and the child (when school age in most
                                                                     
          cases) should also be told when a professional’s expertise in an area is newly acquired
          (Jacob & Hartshorne, 2011).                                
            Informed consent as it pertains to a student’s self-referral for counseling involves a
          child or adolescent’s ability to decide for him- or herself that counseling is needed.

=== Page 64 (1 cols) ===
50   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      This may involve a student requesting to speak with the school psychologist and hap-
      pens more often at the secondary than elementary level. Ethical guidelines for both APA
      (2002) and NASP (2010) indicate that written parent consent is needed for provision
      of services to minors, which is based on state laws that identify parents as the guardians
      or decision makers for the services their child receives. Instances where the state is the
      guardian of a child or an adolescent is emancipated are exceptions. Access for treatment
      for minors is allowed in some states but generally involves medical treatment, such as
      substance abuse, and most often does extend to the school setting (Jacob & Hartshorne,
      2011). Although parent consent is needed for ongoing treatment or counseling, a pre-
      counseling meeting (Canter, 1989) to assess for safety factors is suggested with the need
      for parent consent explained to the student.                   
        Practicum and intern experiences are an integral part of graduate training programs
      in school psychology, clinical psychology, social work, and school counseling. However,
      although this training is important for the skill development of the graduate student,
      parents and adult students need to be informed that treatment will be completed by a
      student. This information should be provided prior to the commencement of services. It
      is also important that the role of supervisors or consultants be explained specifically with
      respect to information that will be shared and their role in treatment planning. Knapp
      and VandeCreek (1997) recommend that parents and adult students be given contact
      numbers for the student’s supervisor.                          
        Bray, Shepherd, and Hays (1985) suggest that the following must be included for
      valid consent: (a) a complete explanation of the treatment, risks, discomforts, and ben-
      efits; (b) a description of other possible treatment alternatives; (c) an offer to discuss
      the procedures or answer any questions; and (d) the information that the client is free
      to withdraw consent at any time and discontinue treatment. Consent obtained pur-
      suant to these disclosures will be express consent. Apparent consent and consent implied
      by law are two other types of consent. In apparent consent, all parties act as if consent
      was given, when in actuality none was formally stated. Consent implied by law comes
      into play in questions of competency for clients most frequently seen by mental health
      professionals in hospital or inpatient settings (Slovenko, 1973).
        One of the major controversies in this area is the age at which a person may legally
      consent to treatment (Bray et al., 1985; Grisso & Vierling, 1978; Jacob & Hartshorne,
      2011; Sadoff, 1985). Although Bersoff (1982) notes that there has been a general trend
      for the courts to grant adolescents greater leeway in obtaining medical or psychological
      intervention without parental permission, there is no question that treatment of pread-
      olescents should involve the consent of parents or legal guardians (Reynolds, Gutkin,
      Elliot, & Witt, 1984).                                         
        An issue tangentially related to informed consent involves discussing medication
      trials for a student with his or her parents or guardian. With the increase in the

=== Page 65 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 51
                                                                     
          prescription of medications to children and adolescents, many of which have been
          tested only on adults, it is important that school-based mental health professionals be
                                                                     
          aware of characteristics of commonly prescribed medications, such as side effects and
          length of time for therapeutic effects to be noted, and impact of sudden discontinuation
          of medications. Generally, legal decisions have supported the parents’ right to make
          decisions about medications that are prescribed to their children, and this is viewed as
          an issue to be decided between parent and physician. Litigation that involved a school
          district’s request for a child taking a prescription medication to be allowed to attend
          school have not been upheld. In Benskin v. Taft City School District (1980), a California
                                                                     
          court approved a settlement lawsuit brought by 18 students and their parents that
          claimed that the school district and staff pressured them to place their children on
          medications without complete evaluations and minimal or no classroom interventions.
          The court decision gave policy clarifications that prevented a school district from
          diagnosing ADHD or recommending that a child take medications for this disorder. In
          Valerie v. Derry CO-OP School District (1991), the court upheld that schools may not
          require that a child take Ritalin as a condition for school attendance. According to
                                                                     
          Jacob and Hartshorne (2011), Connecticut, in 2001, became the first state to prohibit
          school personnel from suggesting psychiatric medications to a parent. Because school
          district and state policies vary, it is important for school-based mental health providers
          to be knowledgeable about the policies in their area of residence.
                                                                     
          Access to Records and Right to Privacy                     
                                                                     
          An analogous concern to the confidentiality and privilege issue is the privacy right
          granted by FERPA (1974; popularly known as the Buckley Amendment). Although
          privilege was previously referred to as the protection of testimony or professional opin-
          ion about a client, the data privacy notion discussed in this section is more concerned
          with the release and storage of information (Lombard, 1981).
            The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act essentially mandates the withhold-
          ing of federal funds to schools or other educational agencies that fail to require parental
                                                                     
          consent or a court order for the release of records for other than defined educational
          purposes. With the increasing use of courts to resolve custody, child abuse/neglect, juve-
          nile delinquency, and status offenses, the records of school-based professionals are often
          subpoenaed by clients, states, and adversarial parties. A subpoena may require the pro-
          duction of records, including notes, tape recordings, videotapes, memoranda, letters, and
          any other written material (Schrier, 1980). Though a detailed listing of all the provi-
                                                                     
          sions contained in FERPA is beyond the scope of this chapter, important requirements
          include that (a) parents or students age 18 years or older be told the reasons for release
          and be given a copy of any released records, (b) parents be notified of any court order in
          advance of any release to have an opportunity to contest the contents of school records,

=== Page 66 (1 cols) ===
52   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      and (c) parents can insert modifications into the record and challenge the contents.
      Parental consent must be obtained for release of information for children under age 18.
      For students 18 years of age or over, or those attending postsecondary education, the
      rights for permission or consent shift from the parents to the student.
        The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act does contain an exclusory clause
      regarding the personal records of psychologists and counselors if these files are entirely
      privateandnotavailableto otherindividuals.This“memoryaids”exceptionmakesclear
      that private files of this type shall not be shared with or passed on to any other school
      personnel. They can be shared with a “substitute” without thereby becoming “education
      records” subject to FERPA (Fischer & Sorenson, 1996).          
        The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act also requires that a record be kept
      of all parties requesting and receiving student information and that this record be made
      available to parents or eligible students. School districts may, however, develop policies
      to allow for undocumented exchanges between local district personnel by explicitly stat-
      ing which school officials may have access without parental permission and noting the
      “legitimate educational interests” justifying the access.      
        Withrespecttothereleaseofschoolrecordstononcustodialparents,bothFERPAand
      Page v. Rotterdam-Mohonasen Central School District (1982) clearly entitle the noncusto-
      dial parent to the same access of the child’s educational records as the custodial parent
      (Fischer & Sorenson, 1996). This assumes that no specific court order prohibits contact
      between the child and the noncustodial parent. The federal law indicates that school
      professionals may assume a noncustodial parent’s right to information unless otherwise
      stipulated. In cases where a child has no parent or legal guardian, educational records
      must also be accessible to a guardian or “an individual acting as a parent” (Fischer &
      Sorenson, 1996). Additionally, noncustodial parents are entitled to any school commu-
      nications that are sent to the custodial parent.               
        In a case involving children abused by a school employee, the courts ruled in Parents
      Against Abuse in Schools v. Williamsport Area School District (1991) that interview notes
      of a school psychologist should be released to parents. After allegations and evidence
      of abuse became known, the school psychologist had interviewed the students to assess
      the nature of the abuse and potential emotional consequences, and to assist the parents
      in arranging for appropriate therapy for their children, if needed. The issue involved
      whether FERPA provisions covered these notes. The court ruled that FERPA provi-
      sions did apply and ordered the release of the interview notes. Thus, even more informal
      “clinical” notes do not avoid release to parents if requested. 
        The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (1996) dictates that ther-
      apists follow federal guidelines related to patient confidentiality in the areas of informed
      consent, record storage, employee training, record security, and some electronic trans-
      missions of patient information (Harmell, 2005). Under HIPPA, electronic transmission

=== Page 67 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 53
                                                                     
          includes the use of computers to send information through attachments or e-mail and
          computer faxes, but does not include freestanding fax machines or telephone lines.
                                                                     
          Parents of minor children and adult students must be informed of possible problems
          with confidentiality through electronic transmissions. Under HIPPA, private notes of
          a psychologist are not available to the client or insurance company, although progress
          notes are. Therapy notes must be kept in separate files and are able to be subpoenaed by
          court order.                                               
                                                                     
                                                                     
          SCHOOL-BASED  INTERVENTIONS                                
                                                                     
          The NASP (2010) principles for professional ethics states that “School psycholo-
          gists actively monitor the impact of their recommendations and intervention plans.
          They revise a recommendation, or modify or terminate an intervention plan, when data
          indicate the desired outcomes are not being attained. School psychologists seek the
          assistance of others in supervisory, consultative, or referral roles when progress monitor-
                                                                     
          ing indicates that their recommendations and interventions are not effective in assisting
          a client.” (p. 7; Principle II.2., Standard II. 2.2). This premise is also supported by
          American Psychological Association’s (2002) ethical standards and American School
          Counselor Association (2010) standards. A primary intervention used in schools
          by mental health providers is related to plans to change behavior, increase desired,
          appropriate behaviors, and reduce the occurrence and frequency of disruptive, inappro-
          priate behaviors. The IDEIA reauthorization in 2004 now requires that evidence-based
                                                                     
          behavioral interventions be used for children with disabilities when behaviors are
          disruptive to learning and also as part of prereferral interventions for children with
          possible learning disabilities (Brown-Chidsey & Steege, 2005). The emphasis is on
          planned, empirically based interventions that monitor a student’s progress in academic
          and behavioral areas when a specific intervention is implemented.
                                                                     
          Behavioral Interventions                                   
                                                                     
          According to Jacob and Hartshorne (2011), behavioral interventions refer to planned
          and systematic use of learning principles to change a child’s behavior through directly
          working with the child or through teacher and parent consultation and collaboration.
          Generally,theteacherisviewedastheprimarychangeagent,althoughtheparentshould
          be included in all interventions. Legal issues associated with behavioral interventions
          include problem identification, intervention, and monitoring.
                                                                     
            During problem identification, the behavior of concern is specifically and oper-
          ationally defined, the situations under which this occurs and the antecedents and
          consequences to the behavior are specified, as well as behavioral frequency. Information
          obtained at this time leads to intervention goals. Potential problems related to problem

=== Page 68 (1 cols) ===
54   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      identification involve selection of objectives that are appropriate for the child. Accord-
      ing to Winnett and Winkler (1972), behavior modification techniques in the late-1960s
      had an emphasis on teaching children to “be still, be quiet, and be docile.” Behaviors to
      be changed often focused on teacher needs rather than on facilitating a child’s learning.
      Harris and Kapche (1978) state that the psychologist is ethically required to teach
      replacement behaviors that will facilitate future learning. Realistic goal setting is a
      critical aspect of problem identification. Yell, Drasgow, and Ford (2000), cited in Jacob
      and Hartshorne (2011), identify a functional behavioral assessment (FBA), as required
      by IDEA, as a mechanism to determine the function that a problem behavior serves
      for a child and involves naturalistic (classroom) and direct observations, teacher and
      parent information, and an analysis component in which factors that are identified as
      impacting the behavior are changed. For example, a disruptive student is seated next to
      a quiet student who is unlikely to respond to comments.        
        The Individuals with Disabilities Improvement Education Act requires that a behav-
      ior intervention plan be developed after completion of the FBA. School psychologists
      are ethically expected to recommend interventions that are effective, act in the least
      drastic way, and minimize adverse effects (Jacob & Hartshorne, 2011). In general, the
      more invasive and restrictive the intervention, the less defensible the intervention is
      from a legal and ethical standpoint. Additionally, aversive techniques are of question-
      able utility, as well as leading to potential legal issues (see Jacob-Timm, 1996; Repp &
      Singh, 1990, provide reviews of aversive techniques and issues associated with the use
      of aversive techniques).                                       
      GROUP  TREATMENTS                                              
      R. Meyer and Smith (1977) present four interrelated axioms regarding the efficacy of
      group therapy. The first two are useful to the discussion of legal issues. R. Meyer and
      Smith (1977) submit that (1) confidences divulged in group therapy have the same
                                                                     
      protection under statutes of privileged communication as do those revelations made in
      individual therapy; and (2) confidentiality is crucial to the effectiveness of group therapy
      (p. 638). Despite the inherent soundness of these statements, the courts have not agreed
      that the status of privileged communication applies to group treatments. As Fischer and
      Sorenson (1996) submit, this is rooted in the reluctance of courts to grant privilege or
      extend it to new types of relationships. Only the state of Colorado has statutes that rec-
      ognize privilege for participants in group therapy. Thus, although the vast majority of
                                                                     
      group therapists and clients assume that the axiom of privilege is in effect (R. Meyer &
      Smith, 1977), there is little or no statutory or judicial assurance for this assumption.

=== Page 69 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 55
                                                                     
          CONCLUSION                                                 
                                                                     
          Conductingpsychologicaltreatmentsforsocial-emotionalproblemsofchildrenandado-
          lescents is a complex and challenging task. The clinical concerns and questions are
          compounded by an array of ethical and legal issues. Clinical options and plans must
                                                                     
          necessarily take these issues into consideration. At a basic level, the ethical principles of
          the major helping professions provide an overall guide for professional behavior. Because
          of their age, developmental level, and the concerns of others (e.g., parents, schools),
          child clients present unique ethical considerations. Similarly, there are some general
          legal issues that apply to persons receiving mental health services, and these are made
          more complicated by the status of child and adolescent clients as minors. Both statutes
          and relevant case law provide further guides for professional behavior. The premises of
                                                                     
          child advocacy and use of empirically based treatment strategies are both ethically and
          legally mandated through organizational codes of ethics and statutes such as IDEA.
            Although some questions in the ethical and legal areas have relatively straightfor-
          ward answers, many gray areas remain. Ethical principles and legal statutes and case
          law do not completely overlap. In some cases, ethical principles may come into con-
          flict with legal guidelines. This chapter has highlighted some of the major issues when
          working with children and adolescents. Finally, we concur with the conclusion of Huey
                                                                     
          (1986)—ethical codes do not supersede the law, but legal knowledge may not always be
          sufficient to determine the most appropriate course of action.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          REFERENCES                                                 
                                                                     
          American Counseling Association. (2014). Code of ethics. Alexandria, VA: Author.
          AmericanPsychiatricAssociation.(2013).Diagnosticandstatisticalmanualofmentaldisorders(5th
            ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.    
          American Psychological Association. (2002). Ethical principles of psychologists and code of conduct.
            Washington, DC: Author.                                  
          American School Counselor Association. (2010). Ethical standards for school counselors.
            Alexandria, VA: Author.                                  
                                                                     
          Arambula,D.,DeKraai,M.,&Sales,B.(1993).Law,children,andtherapists.InT.R.Kratochwill
            & R. J. Morris (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy with children and adolescents (pp. 583–619).
            Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.                               
          Bellah v. Greenson, 181Cal. App. 3d 614, 146Cal. Rptr. 535 (Calif. App. 1978).
          Benskin v. Taft City School District, 14 Clearinghouse Review 529 (1980).
          Bersoff, D. N. (1982). The legal regulation of school psychology. In C. Reynolds & T. Gutkin
            (Eds.), The handbook of school psychology (pp. 1043–1074). New York, NY: Wiley.

=== Page 70 (1 cols) ===
56   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Bersoff, D. N. (2003). Ethical conflicts in psychology (3rd ed.). Washington, DC: American
        Psychological Association.                                   
      Birdsall, B., & Hubert, M. (2000). Ethical issues in school counseling. Counseling Today, 43,
        30–36.                                                       
      Borum, R. (2000). Assessing violence risk among youth. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 56,
        1263–1288.                                                   
      Bray, J. H., Shepherd, J. N., & Hays, J. R. (1985). Legal and ethical issues in informed consent
        to psychotherapy. American Journal of Family Therapy, 13, 50–60.
      Brown-Chidsey, R., & Steege, M. W. (2005). Response to intervention: Principles and strategies for
        effective interventions. New York, NY: Guilford Press.       
      Canter, A. (1989, November). Is parent permission always necessary? Communique, 9.
      Centers for Disease Control. (2012). National Vital Statistics Reports. Retrieved from http://www
        .cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr61/nvsr61_07.pdf                 
      DeMers, S. T. (1986). Legal and ethical issues in child and adolescent personality assessment. In
        H. Knoff (Ed.), The assessment of child and adolescent personality (pp. 35–55). New York, NY:
        Guilford Press.                                              
      Doll, B., & Cummings, J. (2008). Best practices in population-based school mental health
        services. In A. Thomas & J. Grimes (Eds.), Best practices in school psychology V: (Vol. 4,
        pp. 1333–1348). Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists.
      Eisel v. Board of Education of Montgomery County, 597, A.2d 447 (Md. 1991).
      Ewing v. Goldstein, Cal. App. 4th [No. B163112, Second Dist., Div Eight. Jul. 16, 2004].
      Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, 20 U.S.C. A. Sec. 123g with accompanying
        regulations set down in 45C.F.R. Part 99.5.                  
      Fischer, L., & Sorenson, G. P. (1996). School law for counselors, psychologists, and social workers.
        New York, NY: Longman.                                       
      George, J. C. (1985). Hedlund paranoia. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 41, 291–294.
      Glossoff, H. L., & Pate, R. H. (2002). Privacy and confidentiality in school counseling. Profes-
        sional School Counseling, 6, 20–27.                          
      Gottlieb,M.C.(2003).Avoidingexploitivedualrelationships.InD.Bersoff(Ed.),Ethicalconflicts
        in psychology (3rd ed., pp. 207–260). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
      Grisso, T., & Vierling, L. (1978). Minors’ consent to treatment: A developmental perspective.
        Professional Psychology, 9, 412–427.                         
      Gross v. Allen, 22Cal. App. 4th 354 (1994).                    
      Hansen, N., Pepitone-Arreola-Rockwell, F., & Greene, A. F. (2000). Multicultural competence:
        Criteria and case examples. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 31, 652–660.
      Harmell, P. H. (2005). “I Hate It When That Happens            
                                   …                                 
                                     ”: Law and Ethics for Psychologists. Tampa,
        FL: ContinuingEdCourses.Net.                                 
      Harris, A., & Kapche, R. (1978). Behavior modification in schools: Ethical issues and suggested
        guidelines. Journal of School Psychology, 16, 25–33.         
      Hays, P. A. (2001). Addressing cultural complexities in practice: A framework for clinicians and coun-
        selors. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.  
      Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-91 (1996).

=== Page 71 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 57
                                                                     
          Hedlund v. Superior Court, 34Cal. 3d 695, 194Cal. Rptr. 805 (1983).
          Herlihy, B., & Sheeley, V. L. (1986, April). Privileged communications legal status and ethical issues.
            PaperpresentedattheannualconventionofAmericanAssociationforCounselingandDevel-
            opment, Los Angeles.                                     
                                                                     
          Huey, W. C. (1986). Ethical concerns in school counseling. Journal of Counseling and Develop-
            ment, 64, 321–322.                                       
          Hulteng, R. J., & Goldman, E. B. (1987). Potential liability in outpatient practice: A primer
            for psychotherapists. In P. A. Keller & S. R. Heyman (Eds.), Innovations in clinical practice: A
            source book (Vol. 6, pp. 148–153). Sarasota, FL: Professional Resource Exchange.
          IndividualswithDisabilitiesEducationImprovementAct,Pub.L.No.108-446,20U.S.C.¤1400
            et seq. (2004).                                          
          Isaacs, M. L., & Stone, C. (1999). School counselors and confidentiality: Factors affecting
            professional choices. Professional-School-Counseling, 2, 258–266.
          Jacob, S., & Hartshorne, T. (2011). Ethics and law for school psychologists (6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ:
            Wiley.                                                   
          Jacob-Timm, S. (1996). Ethical and legal issues associated with the use of aversives in the public
            schools: The SIBIS controversy. School Psychology Review, 25, 184–198.
          Jagim,R.D.,Wittman,W.D.,&Noll,J.O.(1978).Mentalhealthprofessionals’attitudestoward
            confidentiality, privilege, and third-party disclosure. Professional Psychology, 9, 456–466.
                                                                     
          Johnson, J. H., Rasbury, W. C., & Siegel, L. J. (1997). Approaches to child treatment: Introduction
            to theory, research, and practice (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Pergamon Press.
          Kelson v. The City of Springfield, 767 F.2d 651 (9th Cir. 1985).
          Knapp, S., & VandeCreek, L. (1997). Ethical and legal aspects of clinical supervision. In G. E.
            Watkins (Ed.), Handbook of psychotherapy supervision (pp. 589–599). New York, NY: Wiley.
          Koocher, G. P., & Keith-Spiegel, P. C. (1990). Children, ethics, and the law. Lincoln: University
            of Nebraska Press.                                       
          Lombard, T. J. (1981, August). Current legislative and policy issues related to school psychological
            services. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological Association,
            Los Angeles.                                             
          Mash,E.J.,&Dozois,D.J.(2003).Childpsychopathology:Adevelopmentalsystemsperspective.
            In E. J. Mash & R. A. Barkley (Eds.), Child psychopathology (2nd ed., pp. 3–71). New York,
            NY: Guilford Press.                                      
          Meyer, C. (1997). Expanding Tarasoff: Protecting patients and the public by keeping subsequent
                                                                     
            caregivers informed. Journal of Psychiatry and Law, 25, 365–375.
          Meyer,R.S.,&Smith,S.R.(1977).Acrisisingrouptherapy.AmericanPsychologist,32,638–662.
          Milligan et al. v. City of Slidell, No. 98-31335, WL 1285260 (5th Cir. Sept. 27, 2000).
          Mills,M.J.(1985).Expandingthedutiestoprotectthirdpartiesfromviolentacts.NewDirections
            for Mental Health Services, 25, 61–68.                   
          Miranda v. Board of Education of the City of New York, 84N.Y.2d 44, 637N.E.2d 263, N.Y. LEXIS
            1345. 614N.Y.S. (NY 1994).                               
          Mulvey, E. P., & Cauffman, E. (2001). The inherent limits of predicting school violence.
            American Psychologist, 56, 797–802.

=== Page 72 (1 cols) ===
58   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      National Association of School Psychologists. (2010). NASP principles for professional ethics.
        Washington, DC: Author.                                      
      National Association of Social Workers. (2008). Code of ethics. Washington, DC: Author.
      Ortiz, S. O., & Flanagan, D. P. (2002). Best practices in working with culturally diverse chil-
        dren and families. In A. Thomas & J. Grimes (Eds.), Best practices in school psychology IV
        (pp. 337–352). Washington, DC: National Association of School Psychologists.
      Page v. Rotterdam-Mohonasen Central School District, 441N.Y.S.2d. 323 (Sup. Ct. 1982).
      Parents Against Abuse in Schools v. Williamsport Area School District, 594 A.2d 796 (Pa. Commw.
        Ct. 1991) .                                                  
      Pesce v. J. Sterling Morton High School, 830 F.2d 789 (7th Cir. 1987).
      Phyllis P. v. Claremont Unified School District (86 Daily Journal, D.A.R. 2795, July 30, 1986).
      Poland, S. (1989). Suicide intervention in the schools. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
      Remley, T. B., & Herlihy, B. (2001). Ethical, legal, and professional issues in counseling. Upper
        Saddle River, NJ: Merrill Prentice-Hall.                     
      Repp, A. C., & Singh, N. N. (Eds.). (1990). Perspectives on the use of nonaversive and aversive
        interventions with persons with developmental disabilities. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
      Reschly, D. J., & Bersoff, D. N. (1999). Law and school psychology. In C. R. Reynolds & T. B.
        Gutkin (Eds.), The handbook of school psychology (pp. 1077–1112). New York, NY: Wiley.
      Reynolds, C. R., Gutkin, T. B., Elliot, S. N., & Witt, J. C. (1984). School psychology: Essentials of
        theory and practice. New York, NY: Wiley.                    
      Rhodes, R. L., Ochoa, S. H., & Ortiz, S. O. (2005). Assessing cultural and linguistically diverse
        students. New York, NY: Guilford Press.                      
      Ross, A. O. (1980). Psychological disorders of children: A behavioral approach to theory, research, and
        therapy (2nd ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.                
      Sadoff, R. L. (1985). Competence and informed consent. New Directions for Mental Health
        Services, 25, 25–34.                                         
      Schrier, C. J. (1980). Guidelines for record-keeping under privacy and open-access laws. Social
        Work, 25, 452–457.                                           
      Simmonds,D.W.(1976).Children’srightsandfamilydysfunction:Daddy,whydoIhavetobethe
        crazy one? In G. P. Koocher (Ed.), Children’s rights and the mental health professions (pp. 68–82).
        New York, NY: Wiley.                                         
      Slovenko, R. (1973). Psychiatry and law. Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
      Smith, D. (2003). What you need to know about the new code. APA Monitor, 34, 62.
      State v. Grover, 437N.W.2d 60 (Minn. 1989).                    
      Tarasoff v. Regents of the University of California, 13Cal. 3d 177, 529P.2d 553(1974), vacated,
        17Cal. 3d 425, 551, P.2d 334 (1976).                         
      U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2012). Substance Abuse and Mental Health
        Services Administration,Resultsfromthe2010National SurveyonDrugUseandHealth:Mental
        HealthFindings,NSDUHSeriesH-42,HHSPublicationNo.(SMA)11-4667.Rockville,MD:
        Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.   
      Valerie v. Derry CO-OP School District, 771 F. Supp. 492 (D.N.H. 1991).

=== Page 73 (1 cols) ===
Ethical and Legal Issues in Psychological Interventions With Children and Adolescents 59
                                                                     
          Waldo,S.L.,&Malley,P.(1992).Tarasoffanditsprogeny:Implicationsfortheschoolcounselor.
            School-Counselor, 40, 46–54.                             
          Welfel, E. R. (2002). Ethics in counseling and psychotherapy: Standards, research, and emerging issues
            (2nd ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.               
                                                                     
          Winnett, R. A., & Winkler, R. C. (1972). Current behavior modification in the classroom: Be
            still, be quiet, be docile. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 5, 499–504.
          Yell, M. L., Drasgow, E., & Ford, L. (2000). The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
            Amendments of 1997: Implications for school-based teams. In C. E. Telzrow & M. Tankersley
            (Eds.), IDEA Amendments of 1997 (pp. 1–27). Bethesda, MD: National Association of School
            Psychologists.

=== Page 74 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 75 (1 cols) ===
CHAPTER                             
                                   3                                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Culturally      Responsive       Interpersonal             
                                                                     
               Psychotherapy         with    Children                
                                                                     
                                                                     
                        and    Adolescents                           
                                                                     
                                J                                    
                                 ANINE                               
                                     J                               
                                     ONES                            
                                                                     
                                                                     
          T  he future is near and our population is changing. For the first time in history,
             America’s racial and ethnic minorities represent 49.9% of children under the age
          of 5 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2012). This demographic shift in our population is signifi-
                                                                     
          cant because the census bureau predicts that by 2017, racial and ethnic minorities will
          make up more than half of children under 18 (2012). This demographic shift is par-
          ticularly present in 11% of counties in the United States, which are now considered
          “majority-minority.” Additionally, in 2012, 13 states and the District of Columbia had
          a population of children 0 to 5 years old that was “majority-minority.” Thus, the pro-
          fessionals that serve school age children must be prepared to work with children and
          families from diverse backgrounds.                         
                                                                     
            To provide culturally responsive intervention services, a considerable effort must
          go into the design and process of treatment. This chapter begins with addressing the
          ethical standards for practice and basic constructs in multiculturalism. Aligned with the
          competency-based approach to multicultural therapy, the chapter is organized around
          the therapeutic relationship, the therapeutic process, and the application of skills
          through a case study. The primary focus of the treatment process is linked to a culturally
                                                                     
          adapted version of an evidence-based approach to therapy—interpersonal psychother-
          apy. Thus, this chapter can be used as a guide for a therapist to provide culturally
          responsive treatment for children and adolescents in schools and clinic settings.
                                                                     
                                    61

=== Page 76 (1 cols) ===
62   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      MULTICULTURAL   STANDARDS  OF PRACTICE                         
      As our society has become increasingly multicultural, our national organizations have
      developed guidelines on multicultural education, training, research, and practice. Since
      the early 1990s, psychological organizations began acknowledging the importance of
      culturally centered practice through the development of practice guidelines and sug-
      gested competencies. For example, the American PsychologicalAssociation has adopted
      six guidelines for psychologists to consider when providing psychological services. The
      APA guidelines address the contexts of clinical practice, training, research, and organi-
      zational development (American Psychological Association, 2003). The six guidelines
      are shown in Table 3.1. Prior to the adoption of the APA guidelines, the Association for
      Multicultural Counseling and Development developed a set of 34 multicultural counsel-
      ing competencies (Sue, Arredondo, & McDavis, 1992). The goals of the competencies
      are to address three domains of competence: cultural self-awareness, knowledge of the
      worldview of the client, and developing culturally appropriate skills or intervention
      strategies. Subsequently, both the American Counseling Association and the American
      Psychological Association endorsed these competencies.         
      Basic Considerations                                           
      In order for clinicians to adopt a culturally responsive frame of reference, there must be a
      clear understanding of the basic constructs and language used around multiculturalism.
      Table 3.1 APA Guidelines on Multicultural Education, Training, Research, Practice,
      and Organizational Change for Psychologists                    
      Guideline Description                                          
                                                                     
      1      Psychologists are encouraged to recognize that, as cultural beings, they may hold attitudes
               and beliefs that can detrimentally influence their perceptions of and interactions with
               individuals who are ethnically and racially different from themselves.
      2      Psychologists are encouraged to recognize the importance of multicultural
               sensitivity/responsiveness, knowledge, and understanding about ethnically and racially
               different individuals.                                
      3      As educators, psychologists are encouraged to employ the constructs of multiculturalism and
               diversity in psychological education.                 
      4      Culturally sensitive psychological researchers are encouraged to recognize the importance of
               conducting culture-centered and ethical psychological research among persons from
               ethnic, linguistic, and racial minority backgrounds.  
      5      Psychologists are encouraged to apply culturally appropriate skills in clinical and other
               applied psychological practices.                      
      6      Psychologists are encouraged to use organizational change processes to support culturally
               informed organizational (policy) development and practices.
      Copyright©2003bytheAmericanPsychological Association.Adaptedwithpermission.Theofficialcitationthat
      shouldbeusedinreferencingthismaterialis:AmericanPsychologicalAssociation.(2003).Guidelinesonmulticultural
      education, training, research,practice, andorganizational change forPsychologists. AmericanPsychologist, 58(5),
      377–402.doi:10.1037/0003-066X.58.5.377.Nofurtherreproductionordistributionispermittedwithoutwritten
      permissionfromtheAmericanPsychological Association.            
      Source: American Psychological Association(2003).

=== Page 77 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 63
                                                                     
          Clinicians must recognize and use the concepts in the context of treatment, as the con-
          cepts are not only meaningful to professionals but also to clients. These concepts are
                                                                     
          the foundational principles of culturally responsive treatment and are included in the
          multicultural standards of practice.                       
                                                                     
          Culture                                                    
          According to Banks and McGee Banks (2004), culture includes shared ideas, symbols,
          values, and beliefs between members of a group. Culture encompasses any of the fol-
                                                                     
          lowing categories: race, socioeconomic status, language, ethnicity, disability, sexual ori-
          entation, and religious/spiritual identity. Culture impacts everything we think, do, and
          feel in a given day; therefore, it is the lens through which we view the world. Cultural
          worldview is a term to describe expressions of commonality among a group of individuals
          that share a common concept of reality (Jenkins, 2006).    
                                                                     
          Multicultural                                              
                                                                     
          Many different terms are used to describe the intersecting variables of culture, ethnic-
          ity, race, identity, and difference. By using the term multicultural, it is recognized that
          people are inevitably part of multiple cultures. They have the ability to understand and
          function in multiple cultural environments—while being able to adjust their behavior
          to the norms of each culture.                              
            The term multicultural applies to “a confluence of three or more coexisting and uninte-
                                                                     
          grated cultures (e.g., those that differby age, gender, race, ethnicity, social class, or sexual
          orientation), each of which displays patterns of human behavior” (Oakland, 2005, p. 6).
          Our behavior is guided by thinking and feeling and the intergenerational transmission of
          our cultural worldview sustains patterns of behavior. Sue and Sue (2013) affirmed that in
          multiculturalism,behaviorcanonlybeunderstoodwithinthecontextthatthebehaviors
          exist. By using the prefix multi-, in the word multicultural,we honor the human variation
          that exists between and within groups. We recognize that the intersection of our cultural
                                                                     
          identities may vary dependent on the context. This is an important construct to under-
          stand because there is always potential for incongruence between the multidimensional
          cultures of the client and the therapist and in the therapeutic relationship. Thus, careful
          attention must be paid to the interaction of the therapist-client cultures in the thera-
          peutic process. If the therapist adopts a multicultural frame of reference, they will apply
          a multicultural lens to conceptualize the clinical work, the counseling relationship, and
          to determine culturally relevant treatment outcomes. This clinical approach leads to
                                                                     
          multicultural competence.                                  
                                                                     
          Multicultural Competence                                   
          According to Lynch and Hanson (2004), cultural competence is a process and includes
          theabilityto“think,feel,andactinwaysthatacknowledge,respect,andbuildonethnic,

=== Page 78 (1 cols) ===
64   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      socio-cultural, and linguistic diversity” (p. 43). To practice in multicultural competence,
      one would demonstrate respect and skills in integrating multiple aspects of diversity
      simultaneously.                                                
      Collectivistic Orientation                                     
      Collectivism is a worldview that emphasizes the interdependence of every human—a
      view that people need to connect with one another for survival. Collectivism is a basic
      cultural element that stresses the importance of cohesion within social groups and in
      many cases; the group goals are prioritized over individual goals. Many communities of
      color(ethnicminoritygroups)operateinthismanner.Thereisacorefocusonremaining
      connected in the community and working on behalf of the goals of the community,
      and the sense of “we” is much more important than self-determination. In collectivism,
      success for the group is seen as a greater achievement than success of an individual. With
      children and adolescents, the family is the primary “group” and like-minded peers are the
      “social group” where the cultural norms are often enacted. In communities of color, the
      emphasesonfamilyandgrouporientationarecommonculturalnorms.Peoplewithinthe
      group are expected to strive toward family goals and not engage in behaviors that could
      bring dishonor to the family and/or reputation of the family. Similarly, adolescents may
      seek relationships with people that have similar appearance, values, and backgrounds.
      Therapists must consider patterns of collectivism as a cultural norm that may be linked
      to behavior in a positive way (adaptability and social support) or negative way (cultural
      conflict, isolation, social stress).                           
      The Therapeutic Relationship                                   
      The therapeutic relationship includes not just the therapist and the child or
      adolescent—it also includes the family and culture in which the child is embedded
                                                                     
      (Jones, 2008). Thus, treatment must focus on the interaction of the variables between
      the therapist and the client. The therapist should have good self-awareness of cultural
      values and beliefs while also building an understanding of other cultures.
        When the therapist is learning more about other cultures, they must be attuned to
      the fact that they are incorporating new information through a filter—their own lens in
      which they interpret meaning of the world. Awareness of that filter is key to developing
      cultural literacy that is free of bias. In the Sue and Sue (2013) model of multicultural
                                                                     
      counseling, there is a tripartite approach to developing competence of the therapist:
      building self-awareness, developing cultural literacy, and applying clinical skills through
      a multicultural frame. This is a well-established standard for developing basic skills in
      multicultural counseling competence.

=== Page 79 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 65
                                                                     
          Self-Awareness                                             
                                                                     
          One of the first steps to becoming a culturally responsive therapist is to build cultural
          self-awareness. Becoming self aware is much like the skills involved in mindfulness—the
          therapist must be sensitive to the assumptions, values, and biases that are inherent to
          all people and recognize how these characteristics impact their relationships with oth-
          ers. In clinical training programs, faculty usually prepares students by having them look
                                                                     
          at assumptions related to race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, sexual orientation, and
          family status. However, once students graduate and become professionals, it is their
          responsibility to continue to build self-awareness. Unfortunately, many therapists stop
          the self-awareness process and only focus on the interventions that they may apply
          universallytoallclients.Ataminimum,therapistsshoulduseculturallyresponsivetreat-
          ment approaches that will require the analysis and integration of cultural values in the
          treatment. This will, in turn, increase the likelihood that self-awareness will continue
                                                                     
          to grow.                                                   
                                                                     
          Building Cultural Literacy                                 
          Learning about the norms and mores of a given culture is one technique that is essential
          to understanding the worldview of culturally diverse clients. Building cultural literacy
          (or cultural understanding) is also a continual process that will grow with every inter-
                                                                     
          action with a cross-cultural therapeutic relationship. The process of growth is optimal
          when both cultural self-awareness and cultural literacy are developing simultaneously.
          For example, therapists may wonder why clients choose a coping skill that differs from
          their own approach to coping. The only solution is to inquire about the cultural con-
          text and the meaning of the coping skill in that context rather than simply assigning
          a new coping skill because it “fits” the therapist’s life experience. Without understand-
          ing the cultural background of the clients, therapists are at risk of assigning treatment
                                                                     
          approaches that are more appropriate for their own life experience, rather than meet-
          ing the clients where they are and building on preexisting strengths. Both Sue and Sue
          (2013) and Paniagua (2005) have extensive chapters that address building cultural liter-
          acy with specific cultural groups. Many students are reluctant to make any assumptions
          about the culture of a client based on reading about the culture. For some, they fear
          that the result would be stereotyping. This is only partially true. When therapists make
                                                                     
          assumptions about a person based on what they see and read without collecting any
          individual information about the person, it is stereotyping. However, if therapists use
          preexistingcultural literacyasa foundationforworking witha client(orpopulation)and
          build the clinical relationships listening for within-group differences, it is not stereotyp-
          ing. Rather, the recognition that there are within-group differences while also honoring

=== Page 80 (1 cols) ===
66   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      those historical patterns that influence the cultural context is adopting the fundamental
      principles of culturally responsive care.                      
      Applying Multicultural Clinical Skills                         
      The application of clinical skills within a culturally responsive framework is the core
      expectation for the multicultural therapist (Ponterotto, Casas, Suzuki, & Alexander,
      2010; Sue & Sue, 2013). Expanding on the work of Ivey, Pedersen, and Ivey (2001),
      Jones (2009) refers to the application of culturally responsive skills as multicultural inten-
      tionality. To apply multicultural intentionality means to generate culturally responsive
      solutions to problems using multiple points of view—the client perspective, the cultural
      context, and the therapist’s self-awareness. Multicultural intentionality allows the thera-
      pisttoforminterventionplansthatconsiderarangeofoptionsthatfitwithinthecultural
      context and work collaboratively with the client to determine which are the most suit-
      able for their context. The cultural worldview, if appropriately analyzed and interpreted,
      will lead the therapist and client to a solution taking into account within-group cul-
      tural differences.                                             
        In the authors’ 20 years of serving multicultural populations in clinical practice, one
      thing was quite clear—traditional approaches to treatment with children and adoles-
      cents of color are not always the best fit. Adaptations are usually necessary to integrate
      culture and cultural factors into treatment. Elements of evidence-based treatments such
      as cognitive-behavior therapy, dialectical behavior therapy, and applied behavior anal-
      ysis are usually suitable for specific behaviors and disorders, but these approaches lack
      the guide for nurturing culture in the clinical relationship—a key component for collec-
      tivistic cultures. Recall that collectivistic cultures have a keen sense of community and
      connecting with others is a core belief. Therefore, any evidence-based technique should
      be grounded in the expectation that the therapeutic relationship and relationships with
      others are important aspects of the treatment process.         
                                                                     
      USING  INTERPERSONAL THERAPY  WITH CHILDREN                    
      AND  ADOLESCENTS  (IPT-A)                                      
                                                                     
      One evidence-based approach for treatment of adolescents that has been well supported
      in the literature is Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Adolescents (IPT-A; Mufson,
      Pollack Dorta, Moreau, & Weissman, 2004). IPT-A is an approach to treatment where
      symptoms (e.g., depression, anxiety, disruptive behavior) are evaluated in the context
                                                                     
      of interpersonal relationships. The focus on the treatment is on the interpersonal
      conflicts that result from the presence of symptoms and maladaptive responses to the
      interpersonal context. IPT is particularly appropriate for children and adolescents of
      color because interpersonal conflict is extremely troubling to people who operate from

=== Page 81 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 67
                                                                     
          a collectivistic orientation. The sense of “we” is more important than the “me” in
          interpersonal relationships. Thus, a treatment approach that focuses on improving the
                                                                     
          quality of interpersonal relationships will be healing and help the child or adolescent
          move away from maladaptive behaviors. With children and adolescents in general,
          the psychopathology is often most apparent at school in the presence of same-age
          peers and manifests in social relationships. Thus their relationships are more likely to
          be disrupted when a basic cultural value is inaccessible (collectivism). The following
          sections describe the treatment process of IPT-A and specific cultural adaptations
          that can be applied for the therapist to be culturally responsive. This approach will be
                                                                     
          referred to as Culturally Responsive IPT-A (CR-IPTa).      
                                                                     
          THE TREATMENT  PROCESS                                     
                                                                     
          IPT-A includes three phases of treatment: the initial phase, the middle phase, and the
          termination phase. Within each phase, there are four sessions that are completed. The
                                                                     
          phases of treatment are introduced briefly below while this chapter adds specific adap-
          tations to enhance the cultural responsiveness to the treatment approach. For specific
          detail about the individual sessions, see Mufson et al. (2004).
                                                                     
          Phase I: Diagnostic Formulation and Diagnosis Education    
          According to Mufson et al. (2004), the first phase of IPT-A is on determining the appro-
          priate diagnosis for the symptoms that the client is exhibiting and teaching the client
                                                                     
          about the diagnosis. The therapist conducts a thorough analysis of the symptoms, deter-
          minestheinterpersonalcontextofthesymptoms,andworkswiththeclientonestablish-
          ing guidelines for the therapy including the role of the parent and family in the process.
          The authors recommend interviewing and conducting an interpersonal inventory of sig-
          nificant relationships. This is a culturally responsive approach to understanding systems
          ofsupport.Mufsonetal.(2004)recommendtakingtheinterpersonalinventoryandlink-
          ing to the symptoms to build a context for the client’s relationships. The development
                                                                     
          of IPT-A was intended to be a universal approach to treatment, but this author recom-
          mendsadditionaladaptationstoplacethediagnosticformulationintheculturalcontext.
          For Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Therapy with adolescents (CR-IPTa), these
          adaptations include:identifying the cultural context by assessing acculturation, assessing
          ethnic identity development, and conducting intentional multicultural interviews.
                                                                     
          Identify the Cultural Context                              
                                                                     
          One essential step to understanding cultural contexts is to determine the acculturation
          style of the client and their family. According to Berry (1990), acculturation is “the
          process by which individuals change, both by being influenced by contact with another

=== Page 82 (1 cols) ===
68   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      culture and by being participants in the general acculturative changes under way in
      their own culture” (p. 235). Berry’s model of acculturation looks at client values across
      two dimensions: maintenance of native cultural identity and adoption of the values
      of the majority (or host) culture. Four predominant acculturation styles resulted from
      Berry’s work: assimilation, separation, individualism, and integration. Assimilation is an
      acculturation strategy where the individual chooses to adopt the characteristics and val-
      ues of the majority culture and relinquish the native cultural identity. Separation is the
      approach where the person prefers to maintain the native cultural identity and reject the
      values and characteristics of the majority culture. People who employ the individualism
      strategy are those who dissociate from both the majority culture and their native cultural
      identity. They have a preference of identifying themselves as unique and not connected
      with any particular group. Finally the integration is a strategy where the client chooses to
      adopt characteristics of the host/majority culture as well as maintain the native cultural
      identity (Berry, 2005).                                        
        Higher levels of acculturative stress are associated with some of the acculturation
      strategies. A study by Berry, Kim, Minde, and Mok (1987) showed that acculturative
      stress was most associated with the individualism (then called marginalized) group and
      the separation group. Berry (1990, 2005) found that those using the assimilation strategy
      also experienced intermediate levels of acculturative stress. In both studies, the group
      employing the integration strategy revealed the lowest levels of acculturation stress.
      Thus, assessing acculturation is a nuanced process that involves recognizing the aspects
      of culture that may be risk or protective factors.             
        One can assess acculturation through interviewing and direct questioning, observ-
      ing adolescents in the social context, and/or using acculturation questionnaires. For
      example, the Acculturation, Habits, and Interests, Multicultural Scale for Adolescents
      (AHIMSA; Unger et al., 2002) is a scale that was developed to assess acculturation
      in adolescents. It is aligned with Berry’s acculturation model and assesses adolescents’
      orientation toward U.S. culture and their home/native culture. The AHIMSA is a tool
      that canbe used to discuss cultural valuesand acculturationpatterns withinand between
      family members.                                                
      Assess Ethnic Identity Development                             
      When working with children and adolescents, it is essential for the therapist to con-
      sider not only the family cultural context, but also how the child is developing within
      the cultural context. In addition to identity development (e.g., increasing independence
                                                                     
      from parents), children of color are also developing their ethnic identity. There are sev-
      eral models of ethnic identity development that are specific to racial or ethnic groups
      including: Black Identity Development (Cross, 1991), Asian American Identity Devel-
      opment (Chae & Larres, 2010; Kim, 1981; Kitano, 1982), Latino American Identity

=== Page 83 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 69
                                                                     
          Development (Bernal & Knight, 1993; Miville, 2010; Ruiz, 1990) and White Racial
          Identity Development (Hardiman, 1982; Helms, 1995). Therapists can use these the-
                                                                     
          oretical models to help assess where children may fall among stages of ethnic identity
          development within the context of their specific ethnic minority group. For the pur-
          poses of this chapter, one model of ethnic identity development will be discussed as it is
          designed to frame the development process across multiple racial and ethnic groups.
            Atkinson, Morten, and Sue (1998) developed a conceptual framework of racial/
          cultural identity development (R/CID) that captures the complex interaction between
          the client’s cultural background, life experiences, and the client’s attitudes and beliefs
                                                                     
          toward others (Jones, 2009). The authors describe five stages of racial/ethnic identity
          development: (1) conformity, (2) dissonance and appreciating, (3) resistance and
          immersion, (4) introspection, and (5) integrative awareness. In the conformity stage,
          there is an unequivocal preference for the cultural values of the dominant group
          rather than for the values of the ethnic minority group. In the United States, White
          Americans are considered the “dominant” reference group, so in the conformity
                                                                     
          stage, an identification with White American values is preferred to the minority
          racial/cultural heritage. For a young African American child, this might manifest as
          a preference for White dolls, or asking to change their a name to a more Eurocentric
          name. The dissonance stage usually occurs after exposure to an event (or series of events)
          that challenges the client’s self-concept because the ideas are inconsistent with their
          beliefs in conforming to the dominant culture. For example, a bilingual Latina female
          who has an all White peer group may feel completely disconnected from her native
                                                                     
          culture, but is reminded of her Latina status when her peers ask her to “speak Spanish
          and teach [us] about Cinco de Mayo.” This student may experience dissonance after
          being exposed to a reminder of her heritage even though she does not identify with
          it. The resistance and immersion stage is the opposite of the conformity stage. Here,
          the clients endorse minority-based views and values and actively resist against the
          dominant culture. They are very culture-centered and prefer relationships with people
          from similar backgrounds. In the introspection stage, there is no negative attitude toward
                                                                     
          either the minority cultural group or the dominant group so the clients can objectively
          evaluate their views of the world. Emotional conflict occurs in this phase when the
          client recognizes that there are elements of the dominant culture that are functional
          and desirable, but the client is unsure how to incorporate these elements into the
          minority culture. For example, the concept of “selling out” to the minority culture/race
          is often a source of emotional turmoil for these clients. In the integrative awareness
                                                                     
          stage, the clients are able to accept and appreciate aspects of their culture as well as
          aspects of the U.S. or dominant culture. They see that there are both unacceptable
          and acceptable aspects of all cultures and they should examine all characteristics before
          deciding whether to accept or reject the cultural values. Sue and Sue (2013) outline

=== Page 84 (1 cols) ===
70   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      these stages in detail with examples of the client’s attitudes and beliefs as well as the
      therapeutic implications associated with each stage.           
        Using a model such as the R/CID framework to understand the developmental pro-
      gression of a client gives the therapist greater cultural literacy in the context of the
      individual client. Both identity development and ethnic identity development have a
      powerful impact on the social and emotional growth of adolescents. These two devel-
      opmental processes interact simultaneously; therefore, they both warrant attention at
      all times. We can look at the child or adolescent from a variety of perspectives and
      understand the subtle issues impacting their daily decisions.  
      Multicultural Interview (JIMIS)                                
      The Jones Intentional Multicultural Interview Schedule was developed to help prepare
      school psychologists to complete multicultural interviews (Jones, 2009; Jones, 2014).
      This interview method includes questions that facilitate discussion of cultural issues as
      they relate to stress and coping with children and adolescents. The interview questions
      also help the therapist collect relevant cultural information about the family within
      the cultural context. In addition to the questions that are asked for the interpersonal
      inventory, more direct questions about race and culture should be asked. These
      questions will allow the therapist to learn more about the client as an individual within
      the ethnic minority group. For instance, for a child or adolescent who is multiracial,
      the therapist should ask, “How do you identify yourself in terms of race?” “Whom do
      you feel the most connected to?” What experiences do you have with racial conflict?’
      Other questions can explore cultural values: “How does your religion or spirituality
      impact you every day?” “What are some differences in the ways that you relate to elderly
      family members?” or “What are some differences in responsibilities between men and
      women in your culture?” (Jones, 2009). By using multicultural interviewing techniques
      and targeted questions to assess acculturation, the therapist can set the tone for open
      discussions on cultural factors such as race and ethnicity, including the complicated
      dynamics associated with cross-cultural conflict. Simultaneously, therapists can gather
      insight into the values and norms of the child’s home culture. 
                                                                     
      Contracting for the Focus of Treatment                         
      At the end of the first phase of treatment, the therapist should contract with the client
      for primary and secondary focus of treatment. A culturally responsive approach to decid-
      ing on the primary and secondary focus is to consider the adolescent’s acculturation
                                                                     
      style and the interpersonal conflicts that are occurring within that context (Canino
      & Spurlock, 2000). This narrows down the possibilities of topics while also helps the
      therapist remain targeted on the areas of greatest challenge. Take, for example, the stu-
      dent who is interacting with peers using an assimilation style of acculturation. With the

=== Page 85 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 71
                                                                     
          assimilation style, students may attempt to match the dominant cultural norms but their
          behavior may cause them to experience rejection from racially similar peers. They may
                                                                     
          experienceintergenerationalconflictathome becausetheirfamilyexpectsbehaviorthat
          is consistent with the native cultural values. Thus, for this adolescent, the primary and
          secondary focus on treatment may be intergenerational conflict and social fit in peer
          networks. An adolescent using the separation style will likely need interventions that
          are solely based on cultural factors and cultural beliefs. Treatment may focus on cul-
          tural conflicts in peer relationships because their way of interacting may not be socially
          acceptable within the dominant culture (Jones, 2014). Treatment may also need to focus
                                                                     
          on culturally-based coping styles (e.g., spirituality) and the integration of family values
          into school-based interactions. On the other hand, adolescents who do not interact and
          operate under the individualism acculturation style may be socially isolated. This social
          isolation may be the reason why the adolescent is referred for treatment. With individ-
          ualism, the interventions may need to focus on the emotions associated with feeling
          different, having low self-esteem, social isolation, and searching for identity. Finally,
          the integration acculturation style may indicate a need for a complex set of issues as a
                                                                     
          focus of treatment. Adolescents using this style may appear to be bicultural and adap-
          tive, but that does not mean that they live without challenges. Treatment may focus
          on challenging family values, navigating multiple types of peer relationships, and cul-
          tural collisions—situations where they do not know how to act because multiple cultures
          are interacting simultaneously (Jones, 2009). These examples all show that understand-
          ing the client’s acculturation style can be a useful guide for therapists in intervention
          planning and implementation.                               
                                                                     
          Phase II: Facilitated Problem Solving                      
                                                                     
          In the second phase of IPT-A, Mufson et al. (2004) recommend a process of problem
          solving. This includes clarifying the problem area(s), identifying effective treatment
          strategies for the particular problem, and implementing interventions that have the
                                                                     
          greatest potential to resolve the problem. The middle phase is highly collaborative and
          engages the adolescents in their own care by enabling discussions on topics of con-
          cern, monitoring the related symptoms, and using real-time enactments to process new
          ways of interacting. The authors of IPT-A emphasize discussion of feelings overtly and
          connecting all feelings to current interpersonal functioning. One example of a specific
          strategy for managing interpersonal difficulties is including family in a few of the ther-
          apy sessions. In IPT-A, the invitation to participate may include one or two sessions
                                                                     
          and the time would focus on relationship negotiation and clarification of expectations
          between family members. The therapist must be careful to focus on the identified prob-
          lem area, the interpersonal context, and ensure that the discussions are constructive and
          future-focused. A culturally responsive adaptation to IPT-A is to have regular family

=== Page 86 (1 cols) ===
72   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      sessions as part of CR-IPTa. By including important people within the interpersonal
      context, the treatment is more likely to have a lasting impact where the family partici-
      pants can be understood better and also engage in behavior change. In CR-IPTa, Phase
      II could involve split sessions where 30 minutes is for individual therapy and 20 minutes
      includes other family members. The following sections include topics and strategies to
      be included in CR-IPTa.                                        
      Ethnic and Sexual Identity in Treatment                        
      As adolescents begin the process of individuation, the development of identity is a
      core component of daily living. Knowing “who I am” and “who I should be” are fre-
      quent thoughts of adolescents that need to be processed within and between people.
      Often, acculturation style impacts this process where the adolescent may pull away from
      family expectations, but also experience the pain of the acculturation conflict. While
      the adolescent seeks the integration style, the family may expect the separation style
      (a grounding in the native cultural values). This acculturation conflict may be emotion-
      ally distressful to the adolescent and cause the symptoms associated with the reason for
      referral. For example, when a young girl comes from a family where traditional gender
      roles include women marrying and maintaining the household as her primary goal, she
      may feel conflicted emotions when she is attending schools where seeking higher edu-
      cation is the norm. If she adopts the assimilation acculturation style, her family may
      perceive her as rejecting their culture and betraying the family. This is a stressful posi-
      tion for the adolescents who are seeking their adult identity. Thus, it should be a primary
      or secondary focus of the treatment.                           
      Sense-Making in Social Interactions                            
      Social interactions are complex. When they are interacting between and within dif-
      ferent cultural groups, they may find themselves having a difficult time determining the
      appropriate course of action that makes them “fit in” the best. Subtle behaviors have dif-
      ferent meanings in different cultural contexts. In some cultures, specific communication
                                                                     
      styles are seen as positive and empowering while the same communication styles might
      be interpreted negatively in other cultures. For example, in some peer groups, speak-
      ing loudly and being assertive are the appropriate behaviors in a specific social context.
      However, with other peer groups, showing a more passive communication style, using
      observation, and demonstrating respect for a social hierarchy are optimal for best “fit.”
      This means that the adolescent who adopts a bicultural approach to interactions has to
                                                                     
      make constant shifts in behavior to match the social context. Similarly, one of these
      styles may be more consistent with how the adolescent interacts at home while the
      other is more consistent with the culture of the school environment. When the ado-
      lescent demonstrates behavior that is inconsistent with the communication style for a

=== Page 87 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 73
                                                                     
          particular social context, they may experience rejection by a peer group and not have
          the ability to understand what happened. By using the peer interactions in treatment as
                                                                     
          a microcosm for the adolescents’ everyday experiences, the focus of intervention will be
          more targeted toward their needs and the subsequent goals will be more appropriate.
                                                                     
          Treatment Strategy: Communication Analysis                 
                                                                     
          A useful treatment strategy is to listen for culturally laden cues. Therapists need to lis-
          ten carefully to the statements reported by adolescents and think from a cultural frame
          of reference. Benign statements might lead to indications of cross-cultural conflict or
          acculturation conflict even when the adolescent does not directly report the feelings.
          The following are examples of statements that might indicate cultural concerns of an
          adolescent:                                                
                                                                     
                                                                     
          “People Like Me Just Can’t Get a Break”                    
          The key words in this phrase are “people like me.” These words suggest that the clients
          perceive themselves as different from the norm. The behavioral health professional
          would benefit from inquiring directly about the key words and meaning and following
                                                                     
          up with questions about the adolescent’s experiences with racism and discrimination.
          For the therapist, it is important to recognize that it does not matter whether the expe-
          riences with racism are real or perceived by the adolescent. There are many researchers
          who have studied the relationship between perceived racism and health issues (e.g.,
          depression) and health risk behaviors such as substance use (McHale et al., 2006; Sellers,
          Copeland-Linder, Martin, & Lewis, 2006; Sinha, Cnaan, & Gelles, 2007; Wills, Yaeger,
          & Sandy, 2003). The literature reveals that even perceived racial stress impacts health
                                                                     
          and mental health. Therefore, it is essential that therapists are open to discussions about
          race, difference, and the impact on the life of the client. Of note, it is the psychological
          impact of such experiences that should be the focus of the treatment rather than the
          storytelling of racially related experiences.              
                                                                     
          “My Family Thinks I Have Lost My Soul”                     
                                                                     
          This statement gives an indication of the family perception of psychopathology. It may
          also show whether the family could value or devalue traditional approaches to therapy.
          In some cultures, therapy is reserved for the “insane” and those with serious mental ill-
          ness. These same cultures perceive mental illness as disgraceful to the family and will
                                                                     
          avoid addressing the problem using Western-based approaches to care. For example,
          families with a collectivistic orientation will see themselves in the context of the child,
          and if the child has an “illness” it is reflective of the family. Thus, traditional family
          approaches to treatment would be the appropriate course of action. “Soul loss” is a

=== Page 88 (1 cols) ===
74   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      common interpretation of sickness in Hmong culture. In order to treat the sickness,
      the family may seek the help of a shaman to enact rituals for the return of the lost
      soul. Depending on the cultural values of the adolescent, a therapist with good cul-
      tural literacy would demonstrate an ability to explore cultural values in the context of
      the symptoms and determine a course of action that meets the client and family in their
      cultural context.                                              
      “I Have No Idea Who I Am or Who I Am Supposed to Be”           
      When coming from adolescents, this statement is complex because it can encompass
      a variety of challenges in identity. They may be questioning themselves in terms of
      racial/ethnic identity and/or sexual identity. Previous sections in this chapter described
      the ways in which racial and ethnic identity can be explored, but did not address sex-
      ual identity, which also warrants attention. In early adolescence, same-sex preferences
      may emerge and may cause emotional distress and identity confusion. For gay, lesbian,
      bisexual, transgendered, and “questioning” youth, social stigmatization may be directly
      impacting their mental health. For example, the gay, lesbian, or bisexual adolescent may
      be dealing not only with the development of their sexual identity but also the reactions
      of others within their social context. They may experience discrimination, prejudice, or
      even violence as a result of and in response to their sexual orientation. Bullying, includ-
      ingverbalandphysicalharassment,isaprominentproblemamonggayandbisexualmale
      adolescents (Rivers, 2004) and those who have attempted suicide (Friedman, Koeske,
      Silvestre, Korr, & Sites, 2006). Similarly, adolescents of sexual minority status may also
      face the stressor of estrangement from their family due to their sexual orientation. It
      is notable that the complexity is even more enhanced when the student identifies as a
      double minority—an ethnic minority and a sexual minority. In that case, therapeutic
      relationship should include sensitivity to ethnic and sexual identity issues.
        Not only should the therapist pay attention to the interpersonal challenges that are
      associated with sexual minority status, but also the internal experience of sexual minor-
      ity adolescents. Such internalized difficulties may include role confusion, feelings of
      helplessness, anger, sadness, and/or low self-esteem. Facilitating a safe therapeutic envi-
      ronment for this discussion is essential as there may not be another place where they
      can explore their interpersonal relationships in the context of sexual orientation. When
      considering the detrimental and potential cumulative effects of social stigma, family
      estrangement, and other internalized experiences of these students, it is understandable
      that there is increased risk for emotional distress.           
                                                                     
      “My Worlds Collided Today”                                     
                                                                     
      Adolescents who feel they are leading bicultural and/or multicultural lives will make this
      statement. They are usually referring to the confusing situation where they are having

=== Page 89 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 75
                                                                     
          to shift between cultural norms in the same setting but they failed to adapt well to the
          demands of a complex situation. For example, in a racially and culturally mixed envi-
                                                                     
          ronment, a common phenomenon is same group identification. Daniel Tatum (2003)
          addresses the tendency for students to be drawn to peers of the same race or ethnicity in
          the school context as a part of developing their ethnic identity. Simultaneously, as stu-
          dents of color attempt to assimilate in an environment that has a White majority, they
          must learn to adapt to the norms of the majority group. Adolescents may be required to
          behave in one way with one group and shift to another style of communication with a
          different group. While these complex processes are occurring, the adolescent may feel
                                                                     
          “stuck”whentheyareexposedtodifferentculturalgroupsatthesametime.Theinability
          to react or cope with such situations may lead to emotional distress for the adolescent.
                                                                     
          “No One Understands Me”                                    
          This statement can indicate issues with language as well as communication style. For the
          adolescents where English is their second language, they may be dealing with the trou-
                                                                     
          bling pattern of literally being misunderstood. Frequent misunderstandings can cause
          individuals to “shut down” and isolate themselves away from circumstances that may
          lead to further misunderstanding (Jones, 2009). Communication style may also be a
          manner in which a person feels misunderstood. For instance, some cultures are con-
          sidered high context (Sue & Sue, 2013) where nonverbal communication is a more
          powerful means of communication. Nonverbal behaviors (e.g., eye contact, gestures,
          proximity) are learned and there is meaning attached to each nonverbal “signal” within
                                                                     
          an interaction. The therapist needs to have an understanding of cultural norms for the
          context as well as the cultural norms of the adolescent.   
                                                                     
          “I’m Not Like Other Kids—I Don’t Need Much”                
          In the United States, upper class status is associated with the accumulation of materi-
          alistic goods and wealth. By the time preadolescence has emerged, class status is deeply
          embedded into the student’s psyche and they may seek higher ranking among the socio-
                                                                     
          economic social strata. Adolescents who are from poor households may feel discon-
          nected from peers on the basis of their financial circumstances alone. Therapists should
          incorporate socioeconomic status into the variables that may be impacting interper-
          sonal relationships. Phrases such as “I don’t need much” may indicate an adaptive coping
          mechanism, while also demonstrating that they perceive themselves as different. If the
          therapist finds that this topic is particularly distressful and impacting the self-esteem of
                                                                     
          the adolescents, the therapy can focus on building the students up from the inside out.
          For example, therapy sessions can focus on variables that are within their control includ-
          ing: their self-worth, the family value system, and the qualities that they contribute to
          the school, their family, and the community.

=== Page 90 (1 cols) ===
76   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      “I Am Not Light-Skinned, So I Don’t Have a Chance with Him”    
      In African American and Latino cultures, there have been historical negative attri-
      butions associated with darker skin tones. In the times of slavery, the darker skinned
      individuals were more likely to work in the fields whereas lighter skin-toned individuals
      were assigned to roles inside the home—a higher status position among slaves. Similarly,
      amongLatinoAmericanstherearespecifictermsthatareusedtoreferenceskintone.For
      example, Latinos with dark skin may be referred to as morenos or prietos whereas those
      with light skin or kinky hair may be referred to as jabaos or grifos (Paniagua, 2005). The
      use of these terms only has meaning in the context of the client’s experiences. If a parent
      perceives lighter skin color as more “acceptable” in U.S. society, darker children raised
      in the household may have identity conflicts or believe that they face more challenges in
      life than their lighter-toned siblings. For adolescents in the process of developing roman-
      tic relationships, their ideas about race and relationships may be directly connected to
      their self-esteem. Darker-skinned girls with their hair in braids or dreadlocks may feel
      that their relationship choices are limited based on their skin tone and how they choose
      to wear their hair. Thus, the therapist should assess the meaning of the statement in
      the context of the individuals and set goals related to building self-worth using charac-
      teristics that are under their control. In addition, asking questions that challenge the
      assumptions that are made based on skin tone alone is often an empowering activity for
      adolescents and adults alike.                                  
      Treatment Strategy: Role-Playing Alternative Interactions      
      Role reversal and role enactments are an effective approach for helping adolescents
      process difficult interpersonal situations in individual therapy. In addition to process-
      ing the individual emotions that are connected acculturation styles, adolescents can
      practice new approaches to complex situations with the therapist while keeping in line
      with the acculturation style that they prefer. For the adolescents dealing with inter-
      generational conflict, they may role-play a discussion with the therapist where they are
      processing a difference in acculturation style with their parents. The optimal approach
      in this situation is a role-reversal technique where the adolescent can demonstrate the
                                                                     
      conflicting reactions of the parent/family while the therapist can test out new commu-
      nication techniques as they represent the adolescent. The same approach can be used to
      work through situations related to social fit, cross-cultural conflict, role confusion, and
      bicultural interactions.                                       
                                                                     
      Phase III: Termination                                         
                                                                     
      The termination phase focuses on a review of the previous two phases of treatment
      including a reminder of the strategies learned and the changes that have resulted from

=== Page 91 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 77
                                                                     
          the application of the strategies. In traditional IPT-A, this phase should last between
          two and four sessions (Mufson et al., 2004). Termination should also focus on future
                                                                     
          planning including how to handle interpersonal stressors when they reoccur. This phase
          of treatment is sometimes more difficult than the first phase because the adolescent has
          formed an attachment to the therapist and the therapy process has been the context for
          a safe interpersonal relationship. As a result, the beginning of the termination process
          should include discussing feelings associated with ending treatment. If the feelings they
          identify are much like the symptoms that initiated the referral for treatment, this is the
          perfect context to demonstrate how application of the therapeutic techniques can lead
                                                                     
          to healthy interpersonal interactions. The primary tasks of termination include: identi-
          fying successes, generalizing new behaviors to other situations, and planning for future
          treatment or maintenance.                                  
            Identifying successes is the easiest part of the termination process when many suc-
          cessful events occurred. When few exist, it is more important to focus on the small
          achievements that can lead to greater successes over time. Success can be interpreted as
                                                                     
          new interpersonal competencies or skills. This might include times when the adolescent
          waspresentedwithadifficultsituationbutsuccessfullyhandledtheinterpersonalconflict
          in an adaptive way that was also suitable for their cultural context. Success might also
          include the absence of negative interactions with others. Sometimes just acknowledging
          the reduced incidence of negative interpersonal situations is a therapeutic intervention
          in itself. Progress toward goals, even if they are not met yet, may also be interpreted as
          success. Taking the time to walk through the successes builds insight in adolescents and
                                                                     
          their families.                                            
            Termination should also include the discussion of the specific interpersonal strate-
          gies that were effective for the cultural context and produced change in the interactions
          between people. It is easier for adolescents to retain the skills when they have been prac-
          ticed in the second phase of treatment and highlighted during the termination phase.
          The therapist who labels each skill while also soliciting definitions of the skills from the
          clients is more likely to highlight their strengths in a powerful way. Once these strate-
                                                                     
          gies are identified, the therapist and adolescent should take the time to brainstorm about
          how the strategies might be appropriate in the future. Encouraging the adolescents to
          predict challenging situations and practice applying the skills in new context increases
          the likelihood that they will use the skills as well as generalize the skills to multiple social
          contexts. For example, the therapist could use examples from treatment and suggest new
          scenariosthatinvolveacculturationchallengessimilartothosethatwerepresentedearly
                                                                     
          in treatment.                                              
            Depending on the treatment context, there may be limited opportunity to continue
          working with adolescents and their family beyond the first round of care. Together,
          the adolescent, the family, and the therapist need to decide whether additional care

=== Page 92 (1 cols) ===
78   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      is warranted to support further progress. If further treatment is warranted, a return to
      the second phase of treatment might be the approach to take by contracting for a new
      primary or secondary focus of treatment. In other situations, maintenance sessions may
      be set for the future. Mufson et al. (2004) describe maintenance as once-a-month ses-
      sions that occur over the course of a year to prevent a recurrence of symptoms (Mufson
      et al., 2004).                                                 
      SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS  FOR SPECIFIC POPULATIONS               
      Earlier sections of this chapter show that acculturation, identity development, and cul-
      tural conflict are potential sources of distress that should be on the radar of therapists.
      The author applied a more universal approach to addressing cultural issues by describing
      concepts such as collectivism and multiculturalism as common constructs for consider-
      ation. In the sections that follow, the purpose is to identify social marginalization as a
      factor that may influence how and why a person from a particular group may interact
      in a particular way. There is a purpose to many of the cultural norms and beliefs, and
      to ignore the presence of such norms is to ignore part of the person’s social makeup.
      It also invalidates the importance of group membership. Thus, what follows is a brief
      overview of common strengths and challenges that therapists should consider for some
      of the larger ethnic minority groups in the United States.     
      Strengths and Challenges for African Americans                 
                                                                     
      Among the greatest strengths of African Americans are the cultural values associated
      with flexible family roles, kinship and community bonds, spirituality, and parental
      engagement in racial identity development. First, the predominant structure of the
      African American family has been described as matriarchal. Even in two-parent
      households, the mother tends to be the backbone of the household where rules are
      established and enforced based on her expectations. A protective strength of African
      American families is the flexibility in family roles where childrearing is provided by a
                                                                     
      number of people including grandparents, older siblings, cousins, and close friends (Hill,
      1999). These individuals make up an extensive extended family network—which is a
      major source of emotional, social, and economic support (Sue & Sue, 2013). Similarly,
      there are informal kinship bonds that exist between African Americans that exist to
      sustain relationships. These are individuals who are not necessarily related by blood,
      but are considered part of the extended family (Jones, 2007). Spiritual and religious
                                                                     
      values are a well-established additional strength of African American families. Church
      participation provides opportunities for self-expression, community engagement, lead-
      ership, and comfort (Christian & Barbarin, 2001; Sue & Sue, 2013). Spirituality has
      also been shown to be a protective factor that is associated with resilience with African

=== Page 93 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 79
                                                                     
          American children and young adults (Jones, 2007; Watkins, Labarrie, & Appio, 2010).
          Finally, African American parents have been shown to be successful at assisting their
                                                                     
          children in the process of racial identity development and instilling positive self-esteem
          in their children despite chronic exposure to discrimination (Rockymore, 2008). This
          construct, referred to as racial socialization, is directly connected to parenting. Parents
          who address racism directly with their children and help them identify with their own
          race buffer some of the negative effects of discrimination (Fischer & Shaw, 1999).
            The greatest challenge to be addressed in treatment with African Americans is likely
          to be the mistrust that results from chronic experiences with racism and discrimina-
                                                                     
          tion (Obasi & Leong, 2009). Therapists have to be careful not to mimic the responses
          of the majority culture when issues of racism and discrimination are presented in ther-
          apy. Therapists should be aware of the existence of racial oppression and how patterns
          of oppression are sustained over time and continue to impacts generations of African
          Americans. Trust can be gained through acknowledgment that discrimination contin-
          ues to persist, processing the client’s reactions to racial oppression (Jones, 1985), and
          selecting strategies that are empowering and supportive of the client’s cultural strengths.
                                                                     
          Strengths and Challenges for American Indian/Alaska Natives
                                                                     
          American Indian/Alaska natives are a heterogeneous group that is composed of 565
          documented tribes (Sue & Sue, 2013). This diverse community of people is among the
          strong cultural groups with well-established and maintained cultural values. American
          Indians are from a collectivistic culture. According to Garrett (2006), the extended fam-
                                                                     
          ily is the basic unit for the American Indian family structure where children are raised
          by not only their parents but also relatives such as aunts, uncles, and grandparents who
          live in close proximity. Tribal social structure is an important variable to assess because a
          system of interdependence with the tribal community may influence any decision mak-
          ing for all members of the family. Of note, American Indian individuals see themselves
          as an extension of the tribe, and success of the individual is only measured in terms of
                                                                     
          whether the behaviors benefit the tribe (Sue & Sue, 2013). 
            Among the greatest strengths of American Indians are: a sense of spirituality, respect
          for traditional values, extended family networks, allegiance to the tribal community,
          respect for elders, and their respect for nature (Gilgun, 2002).
            The historical and sociopolitical background of American Indians is the source of
          significant challenge, even in the present day. The historic disruption of families, the
          loss of land and resources, and the destruction of the American Indian population due
                                                                     
          to wars and disease make the experience of American Indians unlike any other cul-
          tural group. Knowing the history of persecution is essential to understanding cultural
          mistrust in society today. As American Indian families have spent generations reestab-
          lishing and restoring cultural norms and values, it is important to understand what style

=== Page 94 (1 cols) ===
80   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      of acculturation is being exhibited by the child and tribal community. This will help
      determine the most culturally responsive approaches to treatment. Garrett and Pichette
      (2000) identified five levels of cultural orientation that might be exhibited by an Amer-
      ican Indian: traditional, marginal, bicultural, assimilated, and paratraditional. These
      acculturation levels are similar to those identified by Berry (2005) with the exception
      of paratraditional. Paratraditional is a style where individuals have adopted mainstream
      (dominant) cultural values, but they are making an effort to return to traditional val-
      ues. As with other cultural groups, acculturation conflict may occur between family and
      within the tribal community. Most common is intergenerational conflict between elders
      and American Indian youth (Rieckmann, Wadsworth, & Deyhle, 2004). A child or ado-
      lescent may be pulled toward the pantraditional acculturation approach after becoming
      assimilated into mainstream society. This could be a source of emotional conflict. It
      is important for therapists to understand that for American Indians, spirit, mind, and
      body are interconnected. Mental illness is thought to occur when there is disharmony
      between these three connections. The focus on treatment is to be on restoring balance
      and achieving harmony between mind, body, and spirit.          
      Strengths and Challenges for Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders
      There are vast between-group differences for the Asian American population in the
      United States. Asian Americans consist of 40 distinct subgroups of people who speak dif-
      ferent languages, have different values, and different religions. In the United States, we
      define Asian American as the larger groups in the United States (e.g., Chinese, Koreans,
      Filipinos, Asian Indians, Japanese), immigrants from Southeast Asia (Vietnamese,
      Laotians, Cambodians, and Hmongs), as well as Pacific Islanders (Native Hawaiian,
      Guamanian, and Samoan) (Sue & Sue, 2013). Given the diversity among these Asian
      groups, it is impossible to make any generalizations about Asian Americans. Ideally,
      the therapist would study the history of the subgroup and determine common cultural
      values of the subgroup. Historical and current experiences of the subgroup are key to
      understanding the cultural mores and expectations of the family. Despite the diverse
      perspectives, Sue and Sue (2013) and Paniagua (2005) offer some variables that are
      common across many of the subgroups of Asian Americans. For example, one common
      variable is a collectivistic orientation. Instead of focusing on the needs of an individual,
      Asian families tend to seek goals that bring honor to the family and group. Traditional
      Asian families are hierarchical in structure with the patriarch at the top of the hierarchy.
      Children are expected to defer to their elders out of respect and obligation to the family.
                                                                     
      Parenting styles are more authoritarian, with little commitment to democracy and nego-
      tiation between parents and children. Much like American Indians, there is a holistic
      view of the mind and body so emotional distress may manifest in somatic symptoms

=== Page 95 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 81
                                                                     
          (Conrad & Pacquiao, 2005). Cultural strengths include the clear respect for elders and
          the collectivism orientation as a system of support for coping within the family unit.
                                                                     
            Challenges for Asian American communities include racial identity issues and accul-
          turation conflict. Assessing acculturation style is an essential step to understanding the
          Asian American client. Acculturation provides a window into the presenting prob-
          lems and helps the therapist determine the most culturally appropriate course of action.
          Highly assimilated Asian clients tend to be more open to Western styles of therapy
          while more traditional families will require cultural adaptations to remain in treatment.
          Additionally, Asian Americans continue to experience racism and discrimination today
                                                                     
          (Hwang & Goto, 2009), so the therapist must focus on how to deal with racism and
          change the environment. In schools, this may mean developing interventions at the
          systems level to address discriminatory practices against students of color.
                                                                     
          Strengths and Challenges for Latino/a Americans            
          Latino/a Americans include people in the United States with ancestors that originated
                                                                     
          from Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, Dominican Republic, central or South America. The
          term Latino/a (masculine and feminine versions of the term) is one of many terms that
          are used to address the same population. The majority of Latinos self-identify by their
          country of origin rather than as Latino/a or Hispanic. However, for the purposes of this
          chapter, Latino/a is the most inclusive term to represent this population of people with
          subgroups in it. Collectivism is also a core cultural value for Latino Americans. Develop-
          ing and maintaining interpersonal relationships are central to the culture (Hernandez,
                                                                     
          Garcia, & Flynn, 2010). Family unity, respect, and traditions are important aspects of
          life for Latino Americans. Much like African Americans and American Indians, the
          network of family is inclusive of not only blood relationships, but also informal kinship
          support networks (Jones, 2007). Family roles are well established where the father is the
          patriarch and responsible for the family while the mother is in a position of self-denial
          and sacrifice for the family. Children remain in the role of obedience until adulthood.
          Sustaining these roles is part of familisimo—interdependence among family and close
                                                                     
          friends. Spirituality and religion are also core beliefs that influence coping in Latinos
          and are usually affiliated with strengths.                 
            Treatment with Latino families should focus on acculturation conflicts, experiences
          with racism and discrimination, and the stigma associated with psychological difficul-
          ties. To address these challenges, the therapist needs to explore the client’s heritage
          and openly discuss views of therapy. Intervention strategies must incorporate behav-
                                                                     
          iors that make sense and are familiar to the client and family by linking directly to
          the well-established values for interacting among people (e.g., personalisimo and famil-
          isimo). The degree of acculturation is important for the treatment of Latinos because

=== Page 96 (1 cols) ===
82   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      it can influence both attitudes toward counseling and prognosis for participation in
      treatment. Ethnic identity needs to be explored for youth and adults so that the context
      for acculturation stress can be better understood.             
      Strengths and Challenges for Arab and Muslim Americans         
      Arab Americans and Muslims are among another diverse group of people whose ancestry
      originates in the Middle East and North Africa. Only one quarter of Arab Americans
      are Muslims, and the majority is Christian (Jackson & Nassar-McMillan, 2006). How-
      ever, prejudice leads many Americans to correlate the Arab ethnicity with the Muslim
      religion. Arab Americans are a heterogeneous group of people who represent at least 20
      countries in the Middle East and Africa. The structure of families varies widely among
      Arab Americans depending on the acculturationstrategy and the native country. In gen-
      eral, though, Arab American families value community and an identity that is centered
      on their culture and relationship with God. Among the strengths of Arab Americans are
      the collectivistic orientation, spirituality as a protective factor for stress, and resilience
      from consistent exposure to racism and discrimination.         
        There is a stigma attached to seeking mental health supports outside of the family
      system. Arab Americans turn to prayer and their relationship with God for spiritual
      cleansing and coping with stress. Common problems that may influence the need
      for mental health care are exposure to racism and acculturation conflicts between
      second-generation children and their parents. As with other ethnic minority groups,
      therapists must assess acculturation to determine the appropriate interventions to
      support a child or adolescent.                                 
      CASE STUDY: AMARA                                              
                                                                     
      When adopting a culturally responsive approach to treatment, it is often challenging to
      learn how to integrate individual cultural factors into the therapeutic process. Although
      many of the stages may appear to be intuitive, experienced clinicians understand that
                                                                     
      this is not the case. In fact, one must be quite intentional in integrating culture at every
      stage of treatment. The following section addresses the CR-IPTa model in the context
      of a specific case study.                                      
                                                                     
      Background Information                                         
      Amara is a Cambodian female in the third grade who attends a public school in a
                                                                     
      high socioeconomic status neighborhood. Amara was transracially adopted by her
      single mother when she was 3 years old after having lived with her biological family
      for 1 year and living in foster care for 2 years. Amara attended kindergarten and first
      and second grade at a public school in her neighborhood. Amara’s neighborhood is

=== Page 97 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 83
                                                                     
          an upper-middle-class community with single-family homes and a few newer condo-
          miniums. There is very little racial diversity in the neighborhood. Amara was the
                                                                     
          only student of color in her grade for kindergarten through the second grade. At the
          beginning of her second grade year, her mother was concerned because Amara began
          having “rage episodes” at home when there was any mention of school. Additionally,
          when it was time to do homework, Amara’s frustration tolerance was extremely low and
          she would “explode” at the mention of correcting her errors on homework assignments.
          None of Amara’s anger outbursts (or any other behavior of concern) occurred at school.
            Amara’s mother sought the assistance of a psychologist and the school’s learning spe-
                                                                     
          cialist to determine whether she had a learning disability that was surfacing at this point
          in her schooling. Amara’s teachers were surprised by the request, but were willing to sup-
          port the mother’s curiosity. Even though Amara’s teachers did not have any concerns
          about her academic competence, the school’s learning specialist completed an assess-
          ment of Amara’s learning capabilities. This evaluation determined that Amara is bright
          and her academic skills were above average compared to her same age peers.
                                                                     
          Assessing the Cultural Context                             
                                                                     
          Simultaneously, the psychologist worked with the family to complete a multicultural
          intentional interview to determine all of the variables that might be impacting Amara at
          school and at home. The interpersonal inventory revealed that Amara and her mother
          were particularly isolated from their family and social network. Her mother has a few
          friends who are also adoptive parents who adopted children around the same age. How-
                                                                     
          ever, with their busy lives between work and school, they had no social interactions
          with others for several months. Amara was unable to identify anyone who was a “friend”
          for the interpersonal inventory. She listed names and then dismissed them as “someone
          that is usually mean to me.” She emphasized her desire to include her birth family in
          the inventory and only added her adoptive mother with prompting by the psychologist.
          Amara has not had contact with her birth family for 26 months despite her requests
                                                                     
          for contact. Over the next several sessions, the disrupted interpersonal relationship pat-
          terns were clearer. Amara’s mother thought that Amara was not interested in spending
          time with kids from school because “they see each other enough.” Amara’s interpreta-
          tions of the relationship patterns revealed a different story—she sought friendships, but
          experienced repeated rejection for being different from the other kids.
            Amara was not able to articulate the rejection directly, but she could through stories
          of her experiences and her internalized thoughts. For example, she described situations
                                                                     
          where everyone in the class was invited to a birthday party (except her) and when she
          asked about it the peer said, “I didn’t think you would be able to come because you eat
          differentkindsoffoodthanme.Don’tyoujusteatriceandstufflikethat?”Thisstatement
          did not make sense to Amara because she eats lunch at school and brings the same

=== Page 98 (1 cols) ===
84   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      kinds of foods that the other kids have. An assessment of ethnic identity development
      revealed that Amara was at the level of conformity until she would be presented with
      statements or actions of others that set her into a state of dissonance. The dissonance
      was not anything she could understand and she internalized the experiences as rejection.
      Thus, she would withhold her feelings throughout the day and “lose it” in the evenings
      when she could not process it all.                             
        Her differences were not only present at school, however; she was also reminded of
      her difference every time she was with her mother. Until people got to know her family,
      children and adults would ask, “Oh! That’s your Mom?!” With her mother being White,
      Amara had difficulty initiating discussions about race and difference because she was
      afraid she would hurt her mother’s feelings. Amara was constantly in a state of confusion
      and loneliness. She also said that her “Mom can’t understand how it feels to be brown.”
        In this case, Amara and her mother were adopting the assimilation style of accultura-
      tion. In the past, there were very few discussions of Amara’s native Cambodian cultural
      values, no exploration of the history of her native culture, and her life story was a true
      adoption story—a story that began at the point of her homecoming.
      The Treatment Process                                          
      The treatment focus addressed two aspects of her interpersonal functioning: family and
      peers in the context of her psychological symptoms. The family component of her treat-
      ment plan included developing a life story that included her native heritage. Amara
      and her mother worked on building and understanding of the history of Cambodia,
      immigration patterns to the United States, cultural factors that are maintained across
      generations, and specific (known) details about her birth family in the context of cul-
      ture. This work was intensive and challenging for both Amara and her mother because
      Amara had a difficult time expressing her feelings with proportional intensity. As she
      developed a better understanding of the meaning of her “rages” she was more able to
      align the emotion with the appropriate word and talk through the feelings more easily.
      Over time and with practice, culture and heritage became a regular part of family dis-
      cussions and Amara’s mother received more opportunities to process the confusion and
      rejection that Amara was feeling.                              
        The peer component of the treatment involved changes in their social network.
      Amara’s mother decided to add more experiences in Amara’s weekends and evenings
      that allowed her to connect with a more diverse peer group. This changed Amara’s
      behavior for the remainder of the school year, so that summer her mother decided to
                                                                     
      move Amara to a multiracial, multiethnic Catholic school in a diverse neighborhood.
      Althoughsheandhermotherliveinapartoftownthatisnotraciallydiverse,hermother
      chose to drive her 30 minutes away from home to be in a school where the students “look
      like her” and there is a “respect for diversity.”

=== Page 99 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 85
                                                                     
          Termination and Follow-Up                                  
                                                                     
          In the new school setting, Amara showed adaptive behaviors at school and only occa-
          sionally had the outbursts at home. It became apparent that the open dialogueabout race
          and culture had subsided. Amara reportedly would initiate such discussions when they
          were “too busy” to sit down and focus on the stories and the pictures. As an IPT-A main-
          tenance strategy, the family set appointments on their calendar for their “family time.”
                                                                     
          Thisincludeddoingfamilyarttogether,replicatingmemories,anddoingsymbolicthings
          to connect with the Cambodian culture. They ultimately decided to save money each
          month for a trip to Cambodia. In preparation for this trip, they are practicing speaking
          Khmer and visiting a Cambodian community center.           
                                                                     
          Clinical Summary and Interpretation                        
                                                                     
          The use of CR-IPTa was a crucial approach to treatment for Amara. Her mother’s first
          instinct was to assume that an academic issue was causing the strong emotional reac-
          tions. Amara was not only exploding at home, but also having severe internalized emo-
          tions around peer rejection. Her experiences with rejection were connected to perceived
          racism given that they usually involved her “differences.” Without completing the eval-
          uation of ethnic identity development and acculturation style review, the psychologist
          would not have a sense of the complexity of her emotions. Treatment could potentially
                                                                     
          have focused on behavioral techniques and expression of feeling—without regard for the
          cultural conflicts that were feeding the behaviors. Thus, CR-IPTa facilitated appropriate
          clinical care that was grounded in the underlying treatment factors.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          ANNOTATED  BIBLIOGRAPHY                                    
                                                                     
          Hays, P. A. (2008). Addressing cultural complexities in practice (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: Amer-
            ican Psychological Association.                          
             This book presents a framework for understanding cultural identity. It shows how cultural
            variablesinteracttoformulateonesidentity.Theauthorincludesbroadsystemlevelconstructs
            such as class and region to demonstrate how cultural influences overlap. Additionally, the
            book includes culturally responsive strategies to be used with evidence practices.
                                                                     
          Jones, J. M. (Ed). (2009). The psychology of multiculturalism in the schools: A primer for practice,
            training, and research. Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists.
             This book addresses the influence of multiculturalism in the schools. It reflects on the-
            ory and addresses constructs of privilege and social justice in the context of inclusive school
            practices. The book offers practical suggestions for school psychologists to provide culturally
            responsive services in schools, research, and clinical settings.
          Lopez, E. C., Nahari, S., & Proctor, S. (Eds.). (2015). Handbook of multicultural school psychology:
            An interdisciplinary perspective (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

=== Page 100 (1 cols) ===
86   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
          This book provides a unique look at the multiculturalism with an integrated lens. Impli-
        cations for practice, training, and research are addressed throughout the book. The authors
        offerabalancedviewofapplicationstoassessment,interventions,andconsultation.Thebook
        concludes with an interdisciplinary analysis of a multicultural future.
      Ponterotto, J. G., Casas, J. M., Suzuki, L. A., & Alexander, C. M. (2010). (Eds.). Handbook of
        multicultural counseling (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
          The authors in this book offer a global approach to multiculturalism. The book is orga-
        nized around the theory and practice of multicultural counseling using cutting age research
        and evidence-based approaches. The content is accessible to people new to the construct of
        multiculturalism, but also engages established multicultural clinicians in new approaches to
        treatment. One unique aspect of the book is the window into the personal and professional
        growth of leading researchers in multiculturalism.           
      Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2013). Counseling the culturally diverse: Theory and practice (6th ed.).
        New York, NY: Wiley.                                         
          This text is the most cited reference in multicultural counseling and therapy. This book
        uses a sound conceptual framework to guide clinicians in counseling interventions in the
        context of specific cultures. The emphasis is on increasing cultural literacy with a wide range
        of cultural groups. The authors are sensitive to create a context for practice using universal
        approaches before narrowing down to specific populations. The book is grounded in empirical
        research, theory, and translates the content directly to practice.
      REFERENCES                                                     
      American Psychological Association. (2003). Guidelines on multicultural education, training,
        research, practice, and organizational change for Psychologists. American Psychologist, 58(5),
        377–402. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.58.5.377                      
      Atkinson,D.R.,Morten,G.,&Sue,D.W.(1998).CounselingAmericanminorities:Across-cultural
        perspective (5th ed.). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.              
      Banks, J. A., & McGee Banks, C. A. (Eds.). (2004). Multicultural education: Issues and perspectives
        (5th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.                               
      Bernal, M. E., & Knight, G. P. (1993). Ethnic identity: Formation and transmission among Hispanics
        and other minorities. Albany: State University of New York Press.
      Berry, J. (1990). The role of psychology in ethnic studies. Canadian Ethnic Studies, 23, 7–21.
      Berry, J. W. (2005). Acculturation: Living successfully in two cultures. International Journal of
        Intercultural Relations, 29, 697–712.                        
      Berry, J.W., Kim, U., Minde, T., & Mok D. (1987). Comparative studies of acculturative stress.
        International Migration Review, 21, 491-511.                 
      Canino, I. A., & Spurlock, J. (2000). Culturally diverse children and adolescents (2nd ed.).
        New York, NY: Guilford Press                                 
      Chae, M. H., & Larres, C. (2010). Asian American racial and ethnic identity: Update on theory
        and measurement. In J. G. Ponterotto, J. M. Casas, L. A. Suzuki, & C. M. Alexander (Eds.),
        Handbook of multicultural counseling (pp. 253–267). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

=== Page 101 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 87
                                                                     
          Christian, M. D., & Barbarin, O. A. (2001). Cultural resources and psychological adjustment
            of African American children: Effects of spirituality and racial attribution. Journal of Black
            Psychology, 27, 43–63.                                   
          Conrad, M. M., & Pacquiao D. F. (2005). Manifestation, attribution, and coping with depression
                                                                     
            amongAsianIndiansfromtheperspectivesofhealthcarepractitioners.JournalofTranscultural
            Nursing, 16(1), 32–40. doi:10.1177/1043659604271239      
          Cross, W. E. (1991). Shades of black: Diversity in African American identity. Philadelphia, PA:
            Temple University Press.                                 
          Daniel Tatum, B. (2003). “Why are all the black kids sitting together in the cafeteria?”: And other
            conversations about race (Rev. ed.). New York, NY: Basic Books.
          Fischer,A.R.,&Shaw,C.M.(1999).AfricanAmerican’smentalhealthandperceptionsofracist
            discrimination: The moderating effects of racial socialization experiences and self-esteem.
            Journal of Counseling Psychology, 46, 395–407.           
          Friedman, M. S., Koeske, G. F., Silvestre, A. J., Korr, W. S., & Sites, E. W. (2006). The
            impact of gender-role nonconforming behavior, bullying, and social support on suicidality
            amonggaymaleyouth.JournalofAdolescentHealth,38(5),621–623.doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.
            2005.04.014)                                             
          Garrett, M. T. (2006). When eagle speaks: Counseling Native Americans. In C. C. Lee (Ed.),
            Multicultural issues in counseling: New approaches to diversity (pp. 25–53). Alexandria, VA:
                                                                     
            American Counseling Association.                         
          Garrett, M. T., & Pichette, E. F. (2000). Red as an apple: Native American acculturation
            and counseling with or without reservation. Journal of Counseling and Development, 78,
            3–13.                                                    
          Gilgun,J.F.(2002).Completingthecircle:AmericanIndianmedicinewheelsandthepromotion
            ofresilienceofchildrenandyouthincare.JournalofHumanBehaviorintheSocialEnvironment,
            6, 65–84.                                                
          Hardiman, R. (1982). White identity development: A process oriented model for describing the
            racial consciousness of White Americans. Dissertation Abstracts International, 43, 104A. (Uni-
            versity Microfilms No 82–10330).                         
          Helms, J. E. (1995). An update of Helms’s White and people of color racial identity development
            models. In J. G. Ponterotto, J. M. Casas, L. A. Suzuki, & C. M. Alexander (Eds.), Handbook
            of multicultural counseling (pp. 181–191). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
          Hernandez, B., Garcia, J. I. R., & Flynn, M. (2010). The role of familism in the relation between
                                                                     
            parent-child discord and psychological distress among emerging adults of Mexican descent.
            Journal of Family Psychology, 24, 105–114.               
          Hill, R. B. (1999). Strengths of African American families: 25 years later. Lanham, MD: University
            Press of America.                                        
          Hwang, W. C. & Goto, S. (2009). The impact of perceived racial discrimination on the mental
            health of Asian American and Latino college students. Asian American Journal of Psychology,
            S(1), 15–28. doi: 10.1037/1948–1985.S.1.15               
          Ivey, A. E., Pedersen, P. B., & Ivey, M. B. (2001). Intentional Group Counseling: A microskills
            approach. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.

=== Page 102 (1 cols) ===
88   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Jackson, M. L., & Nassar-McMillan, S. (2006). Counseling Arab Americans. In C. C. Lee (Ed.),
        Multiculturalissuesincounseling:Newapproachestodiversity(3rded.,pp.235–247).Alexandria,
        VA: American Counseling Association.                         
      Jenkins, O. B. (2006). What is worldview? Retrieved from http://orvillejenkins.com/worldview
        /worldvwhat.html                                             
      Jones, A. C. (1985). Psychological functioning in Black Americans: A conceptual guide for use
        in psychotherapy. Psychotherapy, 22, 363–369.                
      Jones, J. M. (2007). Exposure to chronic community violence: Resilience in African American
        children. Journal of Black Psychology, 33(2), 125–149.       
      Jones, J. M. (2008). Best practices in multicultural counseling. In A. Thomas & J. Grimes (Eds.),
        Best practices in school psychology (Vol. 5, 5th ed., pp 1771–1783). Bethesda, MD: National
        Association of School Psychologists.                         
      Jones, J. M. (2009). Counseling with multicultural intentionality: The process of counseling and
        integrating client cultural variables. In J. M. Jones (Ed.), The psychology of multiculturalism in
        the schools: A primer for practice, training, and research (pp. 191–213). Bethesda, MD: National
        Association of School Psychologists.                         
      Jones, J. M. (2014). Best practices in culturally responsive interventions. In A. Thomas &
        P. Harrison (Eds.), Best practices in school psychology. Bethesda, MD: National Association
        of School Psychologists.                                     
      Kim, J. (1981). Processes of Asian American identity development: A study of Japanese American
        women’s perceptions of their struggle to achieve positive identities as Americans of Asian ancestry.
        (Doctoral Dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses. Accession Order
        No. AAI8118010)                                              
      Kitano, H.H.L. (1982). Mental health in the Japanese American community. In E. E. Jones &
        S. J. Korchin (Eds.), Minority mental health (pp. 149–164). New York, NY: Praeger.
      Lynch, E. W., & Hanson, M. J. (2004). Developing cross-cultural competence: A guide for working
        with children and their families (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
      McHale, S. M., Crouter, A. C., Kim, J., Burton, L. M., Davis, K. D., Dotterer, A. M., & Swanson,
        D. P. (2006). Mothers’ and fathers’ racial socialization in African American families: Impli-
        cations for youth. Child Development, 77(5), 1387–1402.      
      Miville, M. L. (2010) Latino identity development: Updates on theory, measurement, and coun-
        seling implications. In J. G. Ponterotto, J. M. Casas, L. A. Suzuki, & C. M. Alexander (Eds.),
        Handbook of Multicultural Counseling (pp. 241–252). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
      Mufson,L.,PollackDorta,K.,Moreau,D.,&Weissman,M.M.(2004).Interpersonalpsychotherapy
        for depressed adolescents (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
      Oakland, T. (2005). Commentary 1: What is multicultural school psychology? In C. L. Frisby &
        C. R. Reynolds (Eds.), Comprehensive handbook of multicultural school psychology (pp. 3–13).
        Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.                                          
      Obasi, E. M., & Leong, F.T.L. (2009). Psychological distress, acculturation, and mental health
        seeking attitudes among people of African descent in the United States: A preliminary inves-
        tigation. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 56, 227–238.

=== Page 103 (1 cols) ===
Culturally Responsive Interpersonal Psychotherapy With Children and Adolescents 89
                                                                     
          Paniagua, F. A. (2005). Assessing and treating culturally diverse clients: A practical guide (3rd ed.).
            Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.                                 
          Ponterotto, J. G., Casas, J. M., Suzuki, L. A., & Alexander, C. M. (Eds.). (2010). Handbook of
            multicultural counseling (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
                                                                     
          Rieckmann, T. R., Wadsworth, M. E., & Deyhle, D. (2004). Cultural identity, explanatory style,
            and depression in Navajo adolescents. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 10,
            365–382.                                                 
          Rivers,I.(2004).Recollectionsofbullyingatschoolandtheirlong-termimplicationsforlesbians,
            gay men, and bisexuals. Crisis, 25(4), 169–175.          
          Rockymore, M. (2008). A practice guide for working with African American families in the child wel-
            fare system: The role of the caseworker in identifying, developing and supporting strengths in African
            American families involved in child protection services. (DHS-4702-ENG 8–06). St. Paul: Min-
            nesota Department of Human Services.                     
          Ruiz, A. S. (1990). Ethnic identity: Crisis and resolution. Journal of Multicultural Counseling and
            Development, 18, 29–40.                                  
          Sellers, R. M., Copeland-Linder, N., Martin, P. P., & Lewis, R. L. (2006). Racial identity mat-
            ters:The relationshipbetween racialdiscriminationand psychological functioning inAfrican
            American adolescents. Journal of Research on Adolescence, 16(2), 187–216.
                                                                     
          Sinha, J. W., Cnaan, R. A., & Gelles, R. J. (2007). Adolescent risk behaviors and religion: Find-
            ings from a national study. Journal of Adolescence, 30(2), 231–249.
          Sue, D., Arredondo, P., & McDavis, R. (1992). Multicultural counseling competencies and stan-
            dards: A call to the profession. Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Development, 20, 64–88.
          Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2013). Counseling the culturally diverse: Theory and practice (6th ed.).
            Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.                                      
          Unger, J. B., Gallagher P., Shakib, S., Ritt-Olson, A., Palmer, P. H., & Johnson, C. A. (2002).
            The AHIMSA acculturation scale: A new measure of acculturation for adolescents in a mul-
            ticultural society. Journal of Early Adolescence, 22, 225–251.
          U.S. Census Bureau. (2012). National population estimates: Annual Estimates of the Resident Popu-
            lationby Sex,Race,and Hispanic Originforthe UnitedStates,States,and Counties:April 1,2010,
            to July 1, 2012. Retrieved from http://www.census.gov    
          Watkins, N. L., Labarrie, T. L., & Appio, L. M. (2010). Black undergraduate experiences with
                                                                     
            perceived racial microaggressions in predominately White colleges and universities. In D. W.
            Sue (Ed.), Microaggressions and marginality (pp. 25–51). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
          Wills, T. A., Yaeger, A. M., & Sandy, J. M. (2003). Buffering effect of religiosity for adolescent
            substance use. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 17(1), 24–31.

=== Page 104 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 105 (1 cols) ===
CHAPTER                             
                                   4                                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                           Play   Therapy                            
                                                                     
                                                                     
                       A  Child-Centered Approach                    
                                                                     
                                                                     
                 S                                                   
                  UE                                                 
                    B                                                
                     RATTON                                          
                          , K                                        
                            ATHERINE                                 
                                   P                                 
                                    URSWELL                          
                                         ,                           
                                          AND                        
                                             K                       
                                              IMBERLY                
                                                    J                
                                                    AYNE             
          S  ince the early 1900s, mental health professionals have embraced the value of play
             in child therapy due to its developmental and growth producing properties. Play,
          a fundamental feature of childhood, is essential to children’s brain development and
          holistic functioning (Perry & Szalavitz, 2006). Through play, children communicate and
          make sense of their experiences comparable to the way adults use words in “talk therapy”
          (Bratton, Ray, & Landreth, 2008; Landreth, 2012; Schaefer & Drewes, 2014). In play
          therapy, children also use play to explore relationships, build mastery, release energy,
          experience catharsis, develop coping strategies, and develop socially (Gil & Drewes,
          2005; Landreth, 2012; Ray, 2011).                          
            Although various theoretical models of play therapy have been developed in its more
          than 100-year history, Child-Centered Play Therapy (CCPT), based on Carl Rogers’s
          (1942) person-centered theory, is not only the longest-standing play therapy modality
          in use today, CCPT is recognized as the most widely practiced (Lambert et al., 2007)
          and researched (Bratton, Ray, Rhine, & Jones, 2005) approach in the United States,
          and the approach has earned a strong international reputation (West, 1996; Wilson &
          Ryan, 2005).                                               
          HISTORY AND STATUS                                         
          Like adult psychotherapy, CCPT has its roots in psychoanalysis (Landreth, 2012).
          The first psychoanalysts believed that the root of adult personality problems was
                                    91

=== Page 106 (1 cols) ===
92   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      the repression and sublimation into the unconscious of aggressive or sexual drives
      during childhood. Freud believed that the first 6 years of life are critical in personality
      formation, and that children’s personalities are still in the process of development.
      Thus, working with children in psychoanalysis was considered a viable treatment
      method. Freud himself described his work with the father of “Little Hans,” but his
      daughter, Anna Freud, developed the most well-accepted, clinically focused theory
      of psychoanalysis with children (Lee, 2009). Even before Anna Freud published her
      seminal work, Hug-Hellmuth, an influential child analyst and supporter of Sigmund
      Freud, began writing about children’s dreams and the psychoanalysis of children
      (MacLean & Rappen, 1991). In her work, Hug-Hellmuth (1920) described the use of
      play in the analysis of children, not as a means of distracting them or holding their
      attention, but as a means by which the child could communicate to the analyst and
      the analyst to the child. Other psychoanalysts, such as Melanie Klein (1932) and
      Winnicott (1971), also developed approaches to child analysis. 
        Ginott (1961), another psychoanalytically-trained psychotherapist, also wrote on the
      importance of play in addressing children’s developmental needs. Although Ginott’s
      most well-known work on play therapy focused on group play therapy, his explanation
      of psychoanalytic theory, his instructions and rationale for setting up a playroom, and
      his discussion of techniques of the child therapist can all be applied to individual child
      analysis. Ginott emphasized the importance of allowing the children to take over the
      direction of the play so that they could express freely their inner conflicts and feelings.
      Similar to Hug-Hellmuth, Ginott believed that the adult’s role in the playroom was to
      be interested and engaged, yet neutral.                        
        Although a few directive play therapy approaches emerged in the first half of the 20th
      century (Hambidge, 1955: Levy, 1939), the humanistic movement was responsible for
      the advancement of the practice of play therapy, most notably through the nondirec-
      tive approach developed by Virginia Axline (1947). Based on her belief in children’s
      ability to solve their own problems and heal through their own self-growth process,
      Axline applied Rogers’ (1942) person-centered approach to her work with children.
      Rogers’ conviction in every individual’s tendency towards self-actualization and posi-
      tive growth was a cornerstone of Axline’s nondirective play therapy. Consistent with
      Rogers’ approach, Axline placed an emphasis on the relationship between the child and
      the therapist and on the importance of providing a supportive environment to facilitate
      the child’s expression in the playroom setting. Axline popularized play therapy through
      the publication of the book, Dibs in Search of Self (Axline, 1964). Clark Moustakas
      (1959) developed a similar relationship-based play therapy approach and highlighted
      the importance of respecting the child’s uniqueness, focusing on the present moment in
      the therapist-child relationship. Later proponents of nondirective play therapy, includ-
      ing Louise Guerney (1983, 2000) and Garry Landreth (1991, 2012), further refined

=== Page 107 (1 cols) ===
Play Therapy 93   
                                                                     
          Axline’s approach into what has become known in North America as CCPT, but contin-
          ues to be recognized as nondirective play therapy in the United Kingdom and elsewhere
                                                                     
          in Europe (Bratton, Ray, Edwards, & Landreth, 2009).       
            A significant development in the application of CCPT was the development of filial
          therapy by Bernard and Louise Guerney in the 1960s (L. Guerney & Ryan, 2013). In this
          pioneering approach, parents received training and supervision in CCPT procedures to
          use with their children (B. Guerney, 1964). Building on the work of the Guerneys, in the
          1980s Garry Landreth developed a more structured and condensed 10-session filial ther-
          apy training format (Landreth & Bratton, 2006), which has developed strong empirical
                                                                     
          support with diverse populations of families. Consistent with the Guerneys’ model, par-
          ents in CPRT are taught child-centered play therapy (CCPT) principles, attitudes, and
          skills to use in weekly, supervised parent-child play sessions as a treatment intervention
          that impacts children and their families on a systemic level while addressing a range of
          problembehaviorsandconcerns.LandrethandBratton(2006)formalizedthe10-session
          training model in a text, Child Parent Relationship Therapy (CPRT): A 10-Session Filial
          Therapy Model, to distinguish the model from other filial therapy approaches. The CPRT
                                                                     
          protocol was manualized by Bratton, Landreth, Kellam, and Blackard (2006) to provide
          practitioners and researchers with a tool for ensuring treatment integrity in implement-
          ing the intervention.                                      
            The field of play therapy grew dramatically over the past three decades as numerous
          theorists, academicians, and practitioners developed specific play therapy approaches
          based on their theoretical views and experiences with children including gestalt play
                                                                     
          therapy (Oaklander, 1988), Jungian play therapy (Allan, 1988), Adlerian play therapy
          (Kottman,1995),ecosystemicplaytherapy(O’Connor,2001),cognitivebehavioralplay
          therapy (Knell, 2009), prescriptive play therapy (Schaefer, 2001), integrative play ther-
          apyapproaches(Drewes,Bratton,&Schaefer,2011),aswellasapproachesthatespoused
          technical eclecticism. However, outcome research to support the efficacy of play therapy
          approaches other than CCPT is scant.                       
                                                                     
                                                                     
          OVERVIEW OF CCPT THEORY/PHILOSOPHY                         
                                                                     
          As noted earlier in this chapter, CCPT developed as a result of Axline’s (1947) appli-
          cation of the principles of person-centered theory to children. As such, CCPT adheres
          to the basic assumptions underlying Rogers’s theory of personality and recognizes the
          relationship between therapist and child as the primary mechanism of change.
                                                                     
          Basic Assumptions                                          
                                                                     
          Rogers’ (1951) 19 propositions serve as the framework for understanding human devel-
          opment and the structure of personality from a child-centered perspective. The child

=== Page 108 (1 cols) ===
94   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      is the center of a constantly changing world of experience and responds to the percep-
      tual field, his or her reality, as an organized whole. Organismic experience includes all
      information available through the senses and through internal feelings. The child has
      one basic actualizing tendency to move toward growth and this actualizing tendency
      is expressed through goal-directed behavior. Behavior is accompanied and facilitated
      by emotion and is best understood from within the child’s internal frame of reference.
      From a child-centered perspective, all thoughts, feelings, and behavior are understood
      as the child’s best attempt to meet his or her needs and to maintain and enhance the
      experiencing organism.                                         
        As the child interacts with the environment, a part of the perceptual field is differen-
      tiated into the self-structure (Rogers, 1951). The self-structure allows the child to make
      predictions about the environment and how others will relate to him and provides a
      framework for the child to make sense of the world and find his place in his family,
      society, and culture (Tolan, 2012).                            
        The self-structure is primarily developed in accordance with the values of one’s par-
      ents or primary caregivers. As a child seeks to meet her need for positive regard, to be
      valued and accepted by others, she develops conditions of worth. Values that are not
      experienced directly by the child are introjected from others as if they were experienced
      directly. For example, a child falls and skins her knee and reaches to be hugged by her
      parent. As she cries and seeks comfort from her parent, she is told not to cry, pulled to
      her feet, and instructed to keep walking. Through this experience, the child learns, “I am
      only valued and accepted if I am strong and self-sufficient.” She then denies or distorts
      her own experiences of feeling vulnerable and desiring comfort from others in order to
      protect her self-structure and to maintain love and acceptance from others. Throughout
      development, children’s experiences are accurately symbolized and organized into the
      self-structure, ignored because they have no relationship to the self-structure, or denied
      and distorted because they are inconsistent with the self-structure.
        Experiencesthatareinconsistentwithhowindividualsseethemselves,others,andthe
      world are perceived as threatening to the self-structure. Under threat, the self-structure
      becomes more rigid in order to protect and maintain itself. When the self-structure is
      such that all of one’s experiences can be accurately symbolized and integrated, the indi-
      vidual is able to abandon previously introjected values for an organismic valuing process.
      Psychological Maladjustment                                    
      Within a child-centered framework, psychopathology is understood in terms of incon-
                                                                     
      gruence between one’s self-structure (including one’s self-concept and one’s conditions
      of worth) and one’s real experience. When one is unable to integrate one’s real, lived
      experiences into his self-concept and value system and either denies, distorts, or ignores
      those experiences, he experiences psychological maladjustment. Incongruence between

=== Page 109 (1 cols) ===
Play Therapy 95   
                                                                     
          the self-structure and real experience often creates “anxiety” or “vulnerability” (Rogers,
          1957) that is most often demonstrated in children through problem behaviors (Ray,
                                                                     
          2011). For example, if a child believes that he should be able to do his math home-
          work without making mistakes and must be a perfect student in order to be valued
          and accepted by others, but has difficulty with multiplication tables, he may experi-
          ence incongruence between his self-structure and his real experience. If the child is
          unable to integrate his real experience of struggling with multiplication because it is
          too threatening to his self-structure and denies his actual experience, he may get angry,
          burst into tears, and yell at his classmate for distracting him from doing his work. In this
                                                                     
          instance, the discrepancy between how the child sees himself and his real experience
          is expressed through externalizing behaviors towards his classmate. The more consis-
          tently and pervasively the child experiences incongruence between self-structure and
          actual experiences the more psychological tension and maladjustment the child may
          experience. This incongruence may be expressed through a variety of externalizing and
          internalizing behaviors.                                   
                                                                     
          Therapeutic Goals and Process of Change                    
                                                                     
          The primary goal in CCPT is to provide a safe and accepting environment that allows
          thechildtoexperienceintegration,self-direction,andgrowth.Rogersdescribedthekind
          of nonthreatening environment necessary for individuals to integrate experiences into
          the self-structure through the six necessary and sufficient conditions for constructive
          personality change (Rogers, 1957).                         
                                                                     
                                                                     
            1. Two persons are in psychological contact.             
            2. The first, whom we shall term the client, is in a state of incongruence, being
              vulnerable or anxious.                                 
            3. The second person, whom we shall term the counselor, is congruent or integrated
              in the relationship.                                   
            4. The counselor experiences unconditional positive regard for the client.
                                                                     
            5. The counselor experiences an empathic understanding of the client’s internal
              frame of reference and endeavors to communicate this experience to the client.
            6. The communication to the client of the counselor’s empathic understanding
              and unconditional positive regard is to a minimal degree achieved (Rogers, 1957,
              p. 96).                                                
                                                                     
                                                                     
            The first condition refers to the necessity that the child and the counselor are in
          contact with one another in such a way that each individual is experiencedby and makes
          a perceptual difference to the other (Wilkins, 2010). The second condition refers to the
          individual’s state of tension resulting from incongruence between the self-structure and

=== Page 110 (1 cols) ===
96   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      one’s actual experience. This state of incongruence often results in confusion, anxiety,
      and distress because there is a conflict between one’s feelings and behavior and one’s
      conscious desires.                                             
        The third, fourth, and fifth therapist-provided conditions of congruence, uncondi-
      tional positive regard, and empathic understanding promote a non-threatening envi-
      ronment that facilitates the child’s integration of his experiences into his self-structure
      according to his own organismic valuing process.               
         • Congruence. Rogers (1980) defined congruence as a close matching between the
           counselor’s real experience, what is present in the counselor’s awareness, and
           what is expressed to the client. Congruence includes the therapist’s openness
           and attunement to her moment-by-moment experience and the counselor’s gen-
           uine experience and expression of unconditional positive regard and empathy
           toward the client. The counselor’s realness and congruence allows the child to
           learn to trust his experiences of the counselor. As the child learns to trust his
           experiences more and begins to make his own evaluations of self and the world,
           he moves toward greater integration between self-structure and his experiencing
           (Tolan, 2012). The counselor’s genuineness within the therapeutic relationship
           is dependent on the counselor’s own self-awareness, self-acceptance, and abil-
           ity to have empathy and unconditional positive regard for her own experience
           (Cornelius-White, 2007).                                  
         • Unconditional positive regard. Rogers (1957) defined unconditional positive regard
           as warm acceptance of every aspect of the client’s experience. Unconditional pos-
           itive regard reflects the counselor’s fundamental belief in the self-actualizing ten-
           dency and understanding that the child’s thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are his
           best efforts to resolve the conflict between his experiences with his self-structure.
           Unconditional positive regard includes complete and total acceptance of both
           the child’s struggle toward a more fulfilling existence and the many self-protective
           defenses the child uses to distance himself from the feared threat of other people
           (Bozarth, 2001; Mearns, 2003). Unconditional positive regard involves hearing
           and accepting the client’s entire world including both his organismic experienc-
           ing and his self-structure and attending to all aspects, both positive and negative,
           of the child’s behavior, play, and nonverbal and verbal communication.
         • Empathic understanding. Empathic understanding involves both perception and
           communication as the counselor aims to see the child and the world as the child
                                                                     
           sees it and to sensitively communicate that understanding to the child. Rogers
           (1975) defined empathic understanding as a process of “entering the private per-
           ceptual world of the other and becoming thoroughly at home in it
                                                   …                 
                                                    being sensi-     
           tive, moment to moment, to the changing felt meanings which flow in this other

=== Page 111 (1 cols) ===
Play Therapy 97   
                                                                     
              person, and                                            
                     …                                               
                       communicating your sensings of his/her world” (p. 4). The coun-
              selor’s empathic understanding facilitates the child’s awareness of and freedom
              to explore her own experiences, even those that have been previously denied
              or distorted.                                          
            The sixth condition refers to the child’s perception of the counselor’s empathic
          understanding and unconditional positive regard. The child’s perception of the
          counselor’s empathy and acceptance depends on the counselor’s actual, congruent
          experience of empathy and unconditional positive regard toward the child, on the
          counselor’s ability to effectively convey and communicate this experience, and aspects
          of the child’s self-structure that may impact her ability to take in the counselor’s
                                                                     
          empathy and acceptance.                                    
                                                                     
                                                                     
          EMPIRICAL SUPPORT                                          
                                                                     
          CCPT is supported by seven decades of continuous and credible research with diverse
          populations of children in school and community settings (Baggerly, Ray, & Bratton,
          2010; Bratton et al., 2005; Bratton & Ray, 2000; Bratton et al., 2010; Lin & Bratton, in
          press; Ray & Bratton, 2010). More than 90 controlled outcome studies have explored its
          effectiveness and summarily concluded that CCPT approaches including filial therapy
          offer a viable and effective intervention for children across cultures.
            As the need for identifying effective early mental health interventions in the United
                                                                     
          States (Bratton, 2010; New Freedom Commission on Mental Health, 2003; U.S. Public
          Health Service, 2000) as well as other countries (Wilson & Ryan, 2005) has received
          national attention, the impetus to provide rigorous empirical support for interventions
          has grown. CCPT research has met the challenge with increased production of stringent
          research over the past two decades, with a total of 64 studies examining CCPT’s effec-
          tivenesswithabroadrangeofpresentingissues;38studiesexaminedtheimpactofCCPT
                                                                     
          delivered directly by professional play therapists and 36 studies investigated the efficacy
          of CCPT delivered by parents and other significant caregivers under direct supervision
          of a CCPT therapist using filial therapy methodology (Center for Play Therapy, 2014).
          Baggerly et al. (2010) provided a comprehensive, detailed review of individual con-
          temporary research studies demonstrating CCPT’s effects on children presenting with
          externalizing problems (including aggression, ADHD, and disruptive behavior in the
          classroom), internalizing problems, global behavior problems, anxiety, depression, aca-
                                                                     
          demic achievement difficulties, speech problems, and stress in caregiver relationships.
            Over the past decade, play therapy researchers produced multiple meta-analyses
          (Bratton et al., 2005; Lin & Bratton, in press; Ray, Armstrong, Balkin, & Jayne,
          in press), comprehensive systematic reviews (Bratton, 2010; Bratton, Landreth, &

=== Page 112 (1 cols) ===
98   C                                                         
            OUNSELING AND                                            
                    P                                                
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                               C                                     
                                HILDREN AND                          
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Lin, 2010; Bratton & Ray, 2000; Landreth, 2012; Ray, 2011; Ray & Bratton, 2010), and
      responded to criticism that play therapy is not supported by sound scientific research
      (Baggerly & Bratton, 2010). CCPT studies comprised the vast majority of research
      identified in these reviews. In the largest meta-analysis of play therapy to date, Bratton
      et al. (2005) concluded from reviewing 93 controlled, outcome studies that play therapy
      including filial therapy demonstrated a large treatment effect of .80 (Cohen, 1988)
      on a broad range of childhood disorders and presenting issues. According to Bratton
      et al.’s meta-analysis, the effect sizes for humanistic/CCPT approaches (ES
                                                        =            
                                                         .92;        
      large effect) was larger than the effect size for nonhumanistic approaches (ES
                                                        =            
                                                         .71;        
      moderate effect).                                              
        Two recent meta-analyses focused exclusively on the efficacy of CCPT. Lin and
      Bratton (in press) used rigorous hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) methods to
      examine the overall treatment effect from 52 controlled outcome studies 1995 to 2010.
      Findings revealed a statistically significant overall effect size (ES
                                               =                     
                                                 .47), indicating a  
      moderate treatment effect for CCPT interventions. Ray et al. (in press) reviewed 23
      controlled studies evaluating effectiveness of CCPT conducted in elementary schools.
      Meta-analysis results were explored using a random effects model and results revealed
      statistically significant effects for outcome constructs including externalizing problems
      (d                                                             
        =                                                            
          0.34), internalizing problems (d                           
                              =                                      
                                0.21), total problems (d             
                                               =                     
                                                0.34), self-efficacy 
      (d                                                             
        =                                                            
          0.29), academic progress (d                                
                          =                                          
                            0.36), and other behaviors (d            
                                              =                      
                                               0.38).                
        In summary, the findings from individual studies, meta-analyses, and comprehen-
      sive systemic reviews provide a strong evidentiary base for CCPT’s use in school and
      community settings. Current research indicates that CCPT can be successfully used in
      diverse sites, with a broad range of ages, with ethnically, culturally and socially diverse
      populations, and with different formats. There is considerable evidence that CCPT is
      effective with children throughout the span of childhood with a range of issues that
      prevent children’s optimal functioning. The empirical support for CCPT’s effectiveness
      cross-culturally is a particular strength and supports its wide applicability.
      CCPT  IN PRACTICE                                              
      Because children are in the midst of developing the ability to symbolize inner experi-
      ences into words, they require an alternative to relying on verbal communication to
      express their feelings and thoughts. Play provides the medium by which children can
      symbolize and express their inner experiences (Wilson & Ryan, 2005). In CCPT, chil-
      dren are provided play materials to allow them a developmentally responsive means to
      express their emotions and experiences concretely and symbolically. Through the child’s
      play and verbalizations, the therapist is able to enter into the child’s experience and
      gain access to the child’s underlying feelings, needs, and desires. If for example, a child

=== Page 113 (1 cols) ===
Play Therapy 99   
                                                                     
          is referred by her parents due to noncompliance and temper outbursts, the child’s play
          may reveal feelings of confusion and powerlessness regarding her parents’ separation.
                                                                     
          The therapist can provide for the child’s safe expression of her feelings and experiences
          in the playroom while working with the parents to help them better understand and
          respond to the needs of their child.                       
            According to Axline (1947), nondirective play therapy/CCPT is based on eight guid-
          ing principles. Axline noted that the therapist should (1) develop a warm, friendly
          relationship with the child; (2) accept the child exactly as he is; (3) facilitate an atmo-
          sphere of permissiveness so that the child is free to express self; (4) recognize and reflect
                                                                     
          the child’s feelings in order to help him gain insight into his behavior; (5) honor the
          child’s inherent capacity to solve his own problems; (6) allow the child to direct the
          therapy; (7) understand that therapy is a gradual process and should not be hurried; and
          (8) establish only those limits necessary to ground the child in the world of reality and
          make the child aware of his responsibility within the therapeutic relationship.
                                                                     
          The Playroom, Toys, and Play Materials                     
                                                                     
          According to Landreth (2012) the optimal playroom size should be approximately 12
          by 15 feet, although an open space of any size may be used. For example, in the case of
          schools where there may be no dedicated space for a playroom, the counselor may create
          a portable play room with a selection of toys (Landreth, 2012). No matter the space, the
          therapist should be intentional about the play materials and toys. Toys should be care-
          fully selected to facilitate (1) a positive relationship with the child; (2) expression of a
                                                                     
          wide range of feelings; (3) exploration of real experiences; (4) testing of limits; (5) posi-
          tive image; (6) the child’s self-understanding; (7) opportunities to redirect behavior that
          is unacceptable to others (Landreth, 2012). Additionally, toys should be representative
          of the cultural experiences of the child. Toys chosen for the playroom can be broadly
          divided into five types: nurturing toys, aggressive toys, toys related to real-life experi-
          ences, communication toys, and mastery toys. The arrangement of toys in the playroom
          should be intentional and displayed on shelving that allows the toys to be easily accessi-
                                                                     
          ble and visible to children. Landreth (2012) provided a comprehensive list of toys, play
          materials, and equipment for a fully equipped playroom as well as a list of play materials
          to avoid.                                                  
                                                                     
          Therapeutic Skills                                         
          The following verbal and nonverbal skills are considered essential to the application
                                                                     
          of CCPT theory to practice: (a) reflecting nonverbal behavior, (b) reflecting verbal
          content, (c) reflecting feeling, (d) facilitating decision making and returning respon-
          sibility, (e) facilitating creativity and spontaneity, (f) esteem building and encouraging,
          (g) facilitating relationship, and (h) limit-setting (Bratton, et al., 2009; Landreth, 2012;

=== Page 114 (1 cols) ===
100   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Ray, 2011). CCPT skills are not to be applied mechanically. Rather, the therapist is
      responsive to the child’s present needs and applies skills based on therapeutic intention.
      Nonverbal skills include being physically and emotionally attuned to the child, show-
      ing genuine interest, and a tone of voice that matches the child’s affect. The therapist’s
      response is made in a manner that is consistent with the child’s developmental level.
      Tone and rate of response should match the intensity, degree of interaction, and the
      affect of the child. For example, if the child is quiet and focused on her task at hand, the
      therapist slows the pacing of responses to avoid disrupting the child’s play or inundating
      the child with verbalizations that are inconsistent with the child’s present experience.
      Reflecting Nonverbal Behavior                                  
      Reflectingnonverbalbehaviorisaskillthatentailsrespondingverballytothechild’splay
      behavior. For example, the child carefully lines up the animals from largest to smallest
      (without any verbalization). The therapist may reflect, “You decided to line those up
      from the biggest to the smallest.” Reflecting nonverbal behavior requires the therapist
      to fully enter into the child’s world and communicates to the child that the therapist is
      interested in and attentive to the child’s play.               
      Reflecting Content                                             
      Reflecting content in play therapy shows acceptance of the child’s experiences and
      actions. As in talk therapy with adults, the play therapist paraphrases what the child is
      verbalizing during the play session. For example, a seven-year-old child is playing out
      a scene with the dolls in the dollhouse and shares that she was excited that her best
      friend was spending the night at her house, but they had a big fight because her friend
      wanted to stay up past bedtime. The therapist responds matching the child’s affect,
      “You were really looking forward to your friend staying overnight, but things didn’t turn
      out the way you expected.”                                     
                                                                     
      Reflecting Feeling                                             
                                                                     
      Reflecting feeling is an important relationship-building skill and requires a keen attune-
      ment to the child’s present emotional experience. A child accidently knocked over a
      tower of blocks he had been carefully constructing for some time and loudly exclaimed,
      “Darn it!” then proceeds to forcefully knock the rest of the blocks down. The therapist
      responds with matched affect, “You are really frustrated with those blocks!”
                                                                     
      Facilitating Decision Making and Returning Responsibility      
                                                                     
      Children have an opportunity to experience themselves as empowered and capable
      when responded to in a manner that promotes decision making and self-responsibility

=== Page 115 (1 cols) ===
Play Therapy 101   
                                                                     
          (Landreth, 2012). In response to a child who asks if it is permissible to put water in the
          sand, the therapist facilitates decision making by responding, “In here, you can decide”
                                                                     
          or “that is up to you.”                                    
          Facilitating Creativity and Spontaneity                    
                                                                     
          In CCPT, a primary objective is to create an environment that allows the child the
          freedom to tap into her internal resources and creative potential, thereby developing
          the child’s capacity to respond with greater spontaneity and flexibility. For example, a
                                                                     
          therapeutic response that facilitates creativity could be “You know lots of ways that you
          can make the dart stick to the wall” in response to the child telling you several ideas she
          has to make the dart stick (regardless of whether her ideas are feasible).
                                                                     
          Esteem Building and Encouraging                            
          Esteem building and encouraging responses are empowering and help children experi-
          ence themselves as capable and worthwhile. This skill recognizes the child’s effort rather
                                                                     
          than praising accomplishments. In response to a child who is trying hard to get the lid
          off of the can of modeling clay, but has not been successful, “you are working hard to get
          that off; you are really determined.” Similarly, if the child succeeded in getting the lid
          off after working hard to get it off, the therapist may respond by saying, “you were really
          determined to get that off and you got it.”                
                                                                     
          Facilitating Relationship                                  
                                                                     
          In CCPT, the child’s experience within the therapeutic relationship is considered the
          primary curative factor, thus relationally-oriented responses are essential to the thera-
          peutic process. Relational responses are always focused on both the child and therapist
          and communicate the intimacy of the relationship. Examples include, “You made that
          special for me” (child makes “special” pretend food and carefully serves it to you); “You
          wish we had more time together” (child tells you at the end of the session that you are
                                                                     
          locked in jail with him and neither of you can leave).     
                                                                     
          Limit Setting                                              
          Landreth (2012) proposed a method of limit setting designed to help the child develop
          self-controlthroughaninternal,decision-makingprocess.ThestepsoftheA-C-Tmodel
          are: (1) Acknowledge the feeling; (2) Communicate the limit; and (3) Target an accept-
                                                                     
          able alternative or choice. CCPT is structured for minimal limit setting. Limits are set
          as needed primarily to provide physical and emotional safety for the child and the ther-
          apist, to protect the playroom, and as a tie to reality. For example the child may want to
          wear the therapist’s expensive prescription glasses; using the A-C-T model, the therapist

=== Page 116 (1 cols) ===
102   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      may respond “you would like to try on my glasses (convey empathy and understanding
      of child’s feelings/desire/intent), but my glasses are not for playing with (communicate
      the limit).” “You can put on the glasses that are in the dress-up trunk,” or if there are
      not any play glasses in the playroom, “There are lots of other things you can play with
      in here” (target acceptable alternative).                      
      CCPT  with Adolescents                                         
      Most people do not have difficulty believing that play is the most appropriate means
      of communication for children in early and even middle childhood, but what about
      adolescents? Are not they too old to play? CCPT therapists can utilize the same
      person-centered principles in working with adolescents as they do with children. They
      can work to communicate congruence, empathic understanding, and unconditional
      positive regard as well as facilitate the other aspects of an environment that is facilitative
      of growth (Rogers, 1957). Although the goal of play therapy and the child-centered
      play therapist’s attitudes are the same for children and adolescents, play therapists need
      to hone their responses depending on the age of the child (Wilson & Ryan, 2005).
      Child-centered play therapists working with adolescents will need to be prepared
      to respond in a way that acknowledges the adolescent’s increasing understanding of
      complex emotions and nuanced social relationships. Similarly, because of the increased
      social development of adolescents, child-centered play therapists will generally express
      congruence in more complex ways with adolescents than with children. Play therapists
      also need to adapt the environment for adolescents. For example, Wilson and Ryan
      (2005) suggest including clay, balls that are soft, playing cards, paints, pens, other
      drawing materials, and miniatures that can be used to create small scenes. The play
      therapist may also adapt the introduction to the playroom so that adolescents feel
      the same permissiveness offered to children (Wilson & Ryan, 2005). Adolescents
      may choose to talk or to work with the materials in the playroom. Their use of both
      mediums of communication may reflect their ambivalence of their identity as a child
      or adult. Preadolescents and adolescents who come to therapy are beginning to deal
      with identity issues, often on top of otherwise difficult circumstances. Additionally,
      child-centered group play therapy, discussed below, may be particularly appropriate
      for adolescents given the importance of their peer group (Bratton, Dillman Taylor, &
      Akay, 2014). Bratton et al. (2014) provided a detailed description of developmental
      responsive CCPT procedures for young adolescents.              
                                                                     
      CCPT  with Very Young Children                                 
                                                                     
      Veryyoungchildren,thoseundertheageof3,areanothergroupforwhomthetraditional
      play therapy structure must be slightly modified. Child-centered play therapists often
      choose filial therapy as a treatment of choice for the very young (Ryan & Bratton, 2008).

=== Page 117 (1 cols) ===
Play Therapy 103   
                                                                     
          As previously mentioned, filial therapy is a model of teaching parents to be therapeu-
          tic agents with their children (L. Guerney & Ryan, 2013; Landreth & Bratton, 2006;
                                                                     
          VanFleet, Sywulak, & Sniscak, 2010). The primary focus for early mental health inter-
          ventions is on children’s attachment with their caregivers because a secure attachment
          provides the child with a firm foundation for continued emotional health (Bratton &
          Ryan, 2008). For this reason, child-centered filial therapy is the treatment of choice for
          young children and is described later in this chapter.     
                                                                     
          Group CCPT Procedures                                      
                                                                     
          In group CCPT, the play therapist’s role is that of a facilitator of emotional and physical
          safety rather than the director of activities (Landreth & Sweeney, 1999). The goals of
          group CCPT are the same as those of individual CCPT, with the primary goal being
          to provide an environment in which the child is free to follow the self-actualizing ten-
          dency and become a more fully functioning person. An understanding of the rationale
          for group CCPT is important when deciding whether group is an appropriate modality
                                                                     
          for a specific child. Group play therapy may help hesitant or extremely shy children take
          more relational risks with the play therapist because they see that their peers do not face
          negative consequences for freely expressing themselves (Ginott, 1961). The presence of
          another child in the room also provides a real life social situation in which children can
          try out new ways of being as they acknowledge new parts of themselves (Ray, 2011). The
          presence of another child also allows children to receive direct feedback about what is
          and is not socially acceptable. The facilitative presence of the play therapist allows the
                                                                     
          child to experience social feedback in as safe an environment as possible (Landreth &
          Sweeney, 1999).                                            
            The child-centered play therapist must make careful decisions about whether a child
          is appropriate for group CCPT (Bratton, Ceballos, & Webb-Ferebee, 2009). For the
          group to be successful, both children must have some desire to be included and accepted
          by other children. Additionally, when forming a group, the play therapist should con-
                                                                     
          sider the extent to which children have exhibited aggressive behavior that could hurt
          others as well as whether a child has a history of sexually acting out on other children.
          Although children who have exhibited these behaviors are not necessarily contraindi-
          cated for group, the play therapist would want to make an informed decision based on a
          thorough understanding of the child’s situation. For example, a child who becomes loud,
          defiant, and physically assertive when angry would not be a good match for a timid, fear-
          ful child. However, the first child might benefit from another child who would stand
                                                                     
          their ground. Similarly, a timid child might be a good match for an outgoing but socially
          awkward child. Play therapists can conduct one individual session with the child as well
          as conduct an interview with the parent as screening measures for determining a child’s
          appropriateness for group (Landreth & Sweeney, 1999). Age is another consideration

=== Page 118 (1 cols) ===
104   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      when forming groups. Generally, children in a group should be no more than one year
      apart so that they are at similar developmental levels and one child does not have a
      strong power advantage. The exception is for intact systems, such as sibling groups, in
      which a wide age range may be present. Additionally, children younger than 5 may be
      less likely to benefit from group play therapy because they tend to be less involved in
      cooperative play and less aware of the play of others. However, with preadolescents and
      adolescents, groups may often be the treatment of choice to address children’s increasing
      need for peer acceptance (Bratton et al., 2014; Ojiambo & Bratton, 2014; Packman &
      Bratton, 2003).                                                
        Several considerations are important for the child-centered play therapist when
      deciding on the size of the group (Ray, 2011). Because the play therapist is intentional
      about providing the facilitative conditions to each child and taking a nondirective
      role, a group of more than two to three children may prove overwhelming because
      of the difficulty of fully attending to the emotions of so many children at one time.
      The noise level in the room with more than two or three children may also preclude
      the play therapist’s ability to fully hear and understand each child. Additionally, the
      space required for more than three children to have the space needed to fully express
      themselves may be impractical for many play therapists. For younger children, smaller
      groups are more ideal (Landreth & Sweeney, 1999). Even for older children, groups of
      more than five are not recommended.                            
      Brief CCPT                                                     
      Theadventofmanagedcareandthenatureofour“quick-fix”societynecessitateadiscus-
      sion about brief, or short-term, CCPT, which is defined here as 12 or fewer sessions (e.g.
      Johnson, 2001; Landreth, 2012). Although the concept of predetermining the number
      of sessions a child needs is at odds with the underlying philosophy of CCPT, a large num-
      ber of sessions is not inherent in CCPT practice. For example, short-term play therapy
      has been shown to be efficacious with preadolescents with learning and behavioral dif-
      ficulties and young children with behavioral and adjustment difficulties (Baggerly et al.,
      2010).Short-term, intensive CCPT, definedasmore thanone sessionper week,hasbeen
      shown to be effective with elementary children with chronic illness and children living
      in a domestic violence shelter (Baggerly et al., 2010). Short-term group CCPT/activity
      therapy reduced the internalizing and externalizing behaviors of preadolescents (Flahive
      & Ray, 2007) and increased the self-esteem of a culturally diverse group of adolescent
      girls (Shen & Armstrong, 2008). CPRT, typically considered a brief or time-limited ther-
                                                                     
      apy, has been shown effective in reducing children’s behavior problems, decreasing stress
      in the parent-child relationship, and increasing parental empathy in as few as seven play
      sessions. Children typically participate in seven weekly 30-minute play sessions with
      their parents while their parents participate in 10 weekly 2-hour sessions with a trained

=== Page 119 (1 cols) ===
Play Therapy 105   
                                                                     
          CPRT therapist. Despite these and other studies that demonstrate short-term and inten-
          sive CCPT can be beneficial to children, Landreth cautions that the therapist must focus
                                                                     
          on allowing the child to direct the process of therapy and providing the conditions that
          facilitate growth, including not expecting rapid change from the child.
                                                                     
          PARENTING  APPLICATIONS                                    
                                                                     
          The importance of a secure parent-child relationship on children’s socioemotional
          development and self-regulation has been well-documented (Perry & Szalavitz, 2006;
                                                                     
          Ryan & Bratton, 2008; Siegel & Hartzell, 2003). Filial therapy is a CCPT-based mental
          health intervention that focuses on strengthening the parent-child relationship while
          also providing emotional support for caregivers and increasing parental efficacy (L.
          Guerney & Ryan, 2013; Landreth & Bratton, 2006). The CPRT model of filial therapy
          training (Landreth & Bratton, 2006) is currently the most used and well-researched
          filial therapy approach with more than 35 controlled outcome studies demonstrating
                                                                     
          its effectiveness for a broad range of presenting issues, 19 of which are randomized
          controlled trials (Bratton et al., 2010). Founded on the filial therapy model of Bernard
          and Louise Guerney, at the heart of CPRT is the premise that a close parent-child
          relationship is the essential factor for children’s well-being and that caregivers can be
          trained as therapeutic agents. Using the manualized protocol (Bratton et al., 2006),
          CPRT-trained therapists supervise parents in CCPT skills to use with their children in
          weekly special play times. In an accepting and supportive environment, parents learn
                                                                     
          to respond more effectively to their children’s emotional and behavioral needs and
          effectively set appropriate limits on their children’s behavior. In turn, children learn that
          they can count on their parents to reliably and consistently meet their needs for love,
          acceptance, safety, and security. CPRT has been successfully adapted and researched
          with teachers and mentors serving as the therapeutic agent. Morrison and Bratton
          (2010) developed a model for working with teachers and coined the term Child Teacher
          Relationship Training (CTRT). More information on filial therapy can be found in L.
                                                                     
          Guerney and Ryan (2013), and specifics on the CPRT and CTRT model of filial therapy
          training is described in detail in Landreth and Bratton (2006) and Bratton et al. (2006).
                                                                     
          EDUCATIONAL  APPLICATIONS                                  
                                                                     
          CCPT has a long and rich history of use in school settings dating back to the 1940s
                                                                     
          (Ray & Bratton, in press). An impressive base of historical and contemporary empirical
          research supports CCPT’s utility in preschool and elementary settings. Since 2000, 13
          randomized controlled studies (total of 558 participants across studies with a mean of 43
          participants per study) have been conducted in school settings. Research indicated that

=== Page 120 (1 cols) ===
106   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      participation in CCPT resulted in positive outcomes for academic achievement (Blanco
      & Ray, 2011), disruptive behaviors including aggression and ADHD (Bratton et al.,
      2013; Garza & Bratton, 2005; Ray, Blanco, Sullivan, & Holliman, 2009; Ray, Schot-
      telkorb, & Tsai, 2007), internalizing problem behaviors (Ojiambo & Bratton, 2014;
      Packman & Bratton, 2003), speech (Danger & Landreth, 2005), and functional impair-
      ment (Ray, Stulmaker, Lee, & Silverman, 2013). Using the CPRT and CTRT models
      described in the previous section, teachers and parents in school settings have been
      trained in CCPT skills to use with children identified as behaviorally and academically
      at-risk.CPRThasbeensuccessfullyimplementedinHeadStartsettingswithlow-income
      Latino parents (Ceballos & Bratton, 2010) and low-income African American parents
      (Sheely-Moore & Bratton, 2010). The principles and skills of CCPT have been suc-
      cessfully applied by CTRT-trained classroom teachers, primarily in Head Start settings
      with at-risk children (Gonzales & Bratton, in review; Helker & Ray, 2009; Morrison &
      Bratton, 2010, 2011).                                          
      CASE EXAMPLE                                                   
      Mia is a 6-year-old female who lived with her adoptive mother, Ms. Marquis, who
      adopted Mia from China when Mia was 6 months old. Ms. Marquis is a 41-year-old
      European American woman who had never been married. Ms. Marquis reported that
      from what she knew, Mia had lived with a single foster family from birth to adoption and
      that the foster family was reported to have loved her and treated her well. Ms. Marquis
      told the play therapist that she and Mia had bonded right away. Ms. Marquis’ mother,
      who did not live in the home, had cared for Mia until Mia was old enough to attend
      kindergarten during the present school year, and even then the elder Mrs. Marquis had
      continued to provide after-school care. However, she had begun to develop some health
      problems, and Ms. Marquis had recently enrolled Mia in an after-school child-care
      program. Ms. Marquis reported that Mia had always been clingy and beginning school
      had been a challenge for her, but that Mia’s clinginess had increased significantly in
                                                                     
      recent months to the extent that Ms. Marquis was having difficulty accomplishing daily
      tasks around the house because Mia wanted her attention and presence constantly. Mia
      had also begun having meltdowns at school.                     
        The therapist was Nate, a 33-year-old Caucasian male who had 8 years of experience
      in counseling children with a specialty in working with children who had a history of
      interpersonal trauma. Nate was a licensed professional counselor, certified school coun-
      selor, and trained in CCPT. He maintained a private practice and was employed by
                                                                     
      the school district as a mental health specialist. He currently participated in a monthly

=== Page 121 (1 cols) ===
Play Therapy 107   
                                                                     
          peer supervision group. Nate conducted play therapy with Mia at his private practice,
          although his playroom at the local elementary school was equipped identically to the
                                                                     
          playroom in his office (Landreth, 2012).                   
            After an initial consultation with Ms. Marquis, Nate began seeing Mia in individ-
          ual play therapy. At first, Mia did not want to go to the play therapy room with Nate.
          However, he did not pressure her to go, but reflected her fear of going with him. Based
          on Mia’s history, Nate had previously prepared Ms. Marquis to accompany Mia to the
          playroom in the case Mia had difficulty separating from her mother. After the first few
          sessions, Mia looked forward to coming to see Nate and went easily to the playroom
                                                                     
          with him. During her first few play therapy sessions, Mia was hesitant to play, spending
          most of the time playing with the sand. When she began playing with the other toys,
          she carefully took one toy off the shelf and then replaced it before getting another toy
          out. In the early sessions, her play mostly reflected themes of mastery with toys that
          were easy for her to use and to control. For example, she often sorted the kitchen uten-
          sils, organized the dollhouse, or sorted the money. As Mia became more comfortable
          and confident, she began to expand her play to more difficult activities at which she
                                                                     
          did not always easily succeed. However, the therapist noticed that Mia rejected all of
          the therapist’s responses to negative feelings. For example, if the therapist said, “You’re
          frustrated with that,” Mia would reply with an emphatic, “No!” and then throw down
          the toy and move to something different. The therapist conceptualized this response as
          Mia having difficulty symbolizing her experience of “failure” into her awareness. In his
          consultations with Ms. Marquis, Nate maintained Mia’s confidentiality by not sharing
                                                                     
          specific details of Mia’s play, but he did consult regularly with Mia’s mother regarding
          Mia’s play themes. For example, Ms. Marquis confirmed Nate’s guess that Mia struggled
          with perfectionism and low-frustration tolerance at home and school. Nate encouraged
          Ms. Marquis to examine her own direct and indirect communication to Mia about the
          value of being perfect. He also requested permission to speak with Mia’s teacher about
          whether her meltdowns at school were associated with Mia’s perceived failures.
            As the sessions progressed, Mia continued to deny or ignore most of the therapist’s
                                                                     
          responses to her feelings of frustration or anger associated with “failure”; however, her
          ability to symbolize her difficulty into her experience seemed to be increasing as she
          would not throw toys down as frequently as before. Mia also began to play out scenes
          with the animals, mumbling under her breath with her back to the therapist. At first
          these play scenes took up only a few minutes of the session, and Mia would immediately
          change to a new play when the therapist responded to her use of the animals. Soon,
          however, they began to take up most of the sessions. At this point, Nate found it was
                                                                     
          necessary for him to work through his own feelings of rejection by Mia. Clearly this play

=== Page 122 (1 cols) ===
108   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      was very important for her, but because she turned her back toward him, Nate felt she
      did not trust him enough to allow him into her play. Nate felt he was a trustworthy per-
      son, and it was difficult for him to accept her decision or need not to share this aspect of
      her play with him. Although Mia did not actively involve Nate in her play, she began
      to verbalize the animals’ conversations and actions more clearly and it became apparent
      to Nate that the child animals continually were being separated from the adult animals.
      Sometimes they were separated because of tragedy and sometimes they were separated
      as punishment. Regardless of the reason for the separation, Nate began to guess that
      Mia feared that any separation from her mother would be permanent and that if she was
      not good, she could be separated from her mother—a fear that seemed to be confirmed
      by Mia’s recent separation from her grandmother who had served as a primary care-
      giver since she was an infant. This conceptualization fit with Nate’s earlier experience
      of Mia having difficulty symbolizing “failure” into her self-structure. If failure or being
      bad meant she could be separated from her mother, then it did not feel safe to symbolize
      those feelings. In play therapy, Nate began to respond to the child animals’ fears in a
      way that was consistent with what he saw as Mia’s fears. Although Mia still sometimes
      rejected his reflections, she did appear to more easily accept responses to the animals
      than responses to herself. Perhaps Nate’s responses to the animals were less threatening
      to her self-structure. Nate did not discuss Mia’s animal play with Ms. Marquis, but he did
      enquire about Ms. Marquis’ methods of discipline at home. Nate suggested Ms. Marquis
      avoid using time outs in which Mia was expected to stay in a separate room alone as
      these measures reinforced the idea that if Mia was naughty, she would be separated from
      her mother. Instead, he suggested that Ms. Marquis use “time in” with Mia when Mia
      was struggling behaviorally. In those instances, Nate instructed Ms. Marquis to reflect
      Mia’s feelings and remove her from the situation using an established routine such as
      holding her and rocking while they read a favorite book together.
        Overall, Mia’s ability to symbolize negative aspects of herself into her self-structure
      appeared to be increasing. Furthermore, Ms. Marquis reported her meltdowns at school
      and home had diminished significantly and that she was somewhat less clingy at home.
      Furthermore, Nate still felt that Mia was primarily using the therapeutic environment to
      explore her attachment with her mother. Therefore, Nate decided to transition to filial
      therapy in which he would teach Ms. Marquis to provide a therapeutic environment
      for Mia during 30-minute weekly special playtimes. Ms. Marquis seemed amenable to
      this plan, so Nate let Mia know they would end their individual play times after 5 more
      weeks. He wanted to give Mia time to work through the ending of their relationship.
      Although Nate felt sad to end his relationship with Mia, he was optimistic that giving
      Ms. Marquis tools to interact therapeutically with Mia would help Mia feel more secure
      in her relationship with her mother.

=== Page 123 (1 cols) ===
Play Therapy 109   
                                                                     
          CONCLUSION                                                 
                                                                     
          Althoughplaytherapyhasevolvedsinceitsoriginsacenturyagotoincludevarioustreat-
          ment approaches grounded in the developmental and therapeutic powers of play, CCPT
          approaches continue to be the most used by practitioners (Lambert et al., 2007) and
                                                                     
          the most widely researched (Bratton et al., 2005). This chapter focused on the theory,
          research, and practice of CCPT. Just as in person-centered therapy with adults, CCPT
          emphasizes the primacy of the therapist-client relationship as the mechanism of sustain-
          able change. According to Axline (1947) and Landreth (2012), the therapist develops
          a warm, friendly relationship with the child, accepts the child as he/she is, creates an
          atmosphere of permissiveness, recognizes and reflects the child’s feelings, acknowledges
          the child’s capacity to solve problems, does not direct the child’s actions, sees therapy as
                                                                     
          a gradual process, and establishes minimal limits. Through the symbolism and concrete
          nature of the play materials, the child is free to communicate all feelings, thoughts, and
          needs and move toward emotional and behavioral health. In order to enhance the effec-
          tiveness of play therapy, the child-centered therapist sees the child within the context
          of a support system, and thus works with parents to help them increase in their under-
          standing of their child and become more invested in the play therapy process. CCPT
          has demonstrated its efficacy with a broad array of presenting issues in various settings.
                                                                     
          CCPT is unique in that its principles and procedures have been shown effective when
          applied by mental health professionals and shown equally effective when practiced by
          caregivers under the supervision of a mental health professional trained in play ther-
          apy. Its broad appeal and usefulness as a treatment modality is further evidenced by its
          successful application with diverse populations of children.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          REFERENCES                                                 
                                                                     
          Allan, J. (1988). Inscapes of the child’s world. New York, NY: Spring.
          Axline, V. (1947). Play therapy: The inner dynamics of childhood. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
          Axline, V. (1964). Dibs in search of self. New York, NY: Ballantine Books.
          Baggerly, J., & Bratton, S. (2010). Building a firm foundation: Response to Phillips 2009. Inter-
            national Journal of Play Therapy, 19(1), 26–38.          
                                                                     
          Baggerly, J., Ray, D., & Bratton, S. (2010). Child-centered play therapy research: The evidence base
            for effective practice. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.              
          Blanco,P.,&Ray,D.(2011).Playtherapyintheschools:Abestpracticeforimprovingacademic
            achievement. Journal of Counseling and Development, 89, 235–242.
          Bozarth,J.D.(2001).Congruence:Aspecialwayofbeing.InG.Wyatt(Ed.),Congruence.Rogers’
            therapeutic conditions: Evolution, theory, and practice (Vol. 1, pp. 184–199). Ross-on-Wye,
            England: PCCS Books.

=== Page 124 (1 cols) ===
110   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Bratton, S. (2010). Meeting the early mental health needs of children through school based play
        therapy: A review of outcome research. In A. A. Drewes & C. E. Schaefer (Eds.), School based
        play therapy (2nd ed., pp. 17–58). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.       
      Bratton, S., Ceballos, P., Sheely-Moore, A., Meany-Walen, K., Pronchenko, Y., & Jones, L.
        (2013). Head Start early mental health intervention: Effects of child-centered play ther-
        apy on preschool children’s disruptive behavior. International Journal of Play Therapy, 22(1),
        28–42.                                                       
      Bratton, S., Ceballos, P., & Webb-Ferebee, K. (2009). Integration of structured expressive activ-
        ities within a humanistic group play therapy format for preadolescents. Journal for Specialists
        in Group Work, 34(3), 251–275.                               
      Bratton, S., Dillman Taylor, D., & Akay, S. (2014). Integrating play and expressive art therapy
        into small group counseling with preadolescents: Process and procedures. In E. J. Green &
        A. A. Drewes (Eds.), Integrating expressive arts and play therapy with children and adolescents (pp.
        253–282). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.                                
      Bratton, S., Landreth, G., Kellam, T., & Blackard, S. (2006). Child parent relationship therapy
        (CPRT) treatment manual: A 10-session filial therapy model for training parents. New York, NY:
        Routledge.                                                   
      Bratton, S., Landreth, G.,&Lin, Y. (2010). Childparent relationship therapy (CPRT): Areview
        of controlled outcome research. In J. N. Baggerly, D. Ray, & S. Bratton (Eds.), Child-centered
        playtherapyresearch:Theevidencebaseforeffectivepractice.(pp.267–294).Hoboken,NJ:Wiley.
      Bratton, S., & Ray, D. (2000). What the research shows about play therapy. International Journal
        of Play Therapy, 9(1), 47–88.                                
       Bratton, S., Ray, D., Edwards, N., & Landreth, G. (2009). Child-centered play therapy: The-
        ory, research, and practice. Journal of Person-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapies, 8(4),
        266–281.                                                     
       Bratton, S., Ray, D., & Landreth, G. (2008). Play therapy. In M. Hersen & A. Gross (Ed.),
        Handbook of clinical psychology, Vol. II: Children and adolescents. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
       Bratton, S., Ray, D., Rhine, T., & Jones, L. (2005). The efficacy of play therapy with children:
        A meta-analytic review of treatment outcomes. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
        36(4), 376–390.                                              
       Ceballos, P., & Bratton, S. C. (2010). School-based child-parent relationship therapy (CPRT)
        with low-income first-generation immigrant Latino parents: Effects on children’s behaviors
        and parent-child relationship stress. Psychology in the Schools, 47(8), 761–775.
       Center for Play Therapy (2014). Play Therapy and Play-Based Intervention Research Database.
        Retrieved from http://cpt.unt.edu/researchpublications/play-therapy-research/
       Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillside, NJ:
        Erlbaum.                                                     
       Cornelius-White, J. (2007). Congruence. In M. Cooper, M. O’Hara, P. F. Schmid, & G. Wyatt
        (Eds.), The handbook of person-centered psychotherapy and counseling (pp. 168–181). New York,
        NY: Palgrave Macmillan.                                      
      Danger,S.,&Landreth,G.(2005).Child-centeredgroupplaytherapywithchildrenwithspeech
        difficulties. International Journal of Play Therapy, 14, 81–102.

=== Page 125 (1 cols) ===
Play Therapy 111   
                                                                     
          Drewes, A., Bratton, S., & Schaefer, C. (Eds.). (2011). Integrated play therapy. New York, NY:
            Wiley.                                                   
          Flahive, M. W., & Ray, D. (2007). Effect of group sandtray therapy with preadolescents. Journal
            for Specialists in Group Work, 32(4), 362–382.           
                                                                     
          Garza, Y., & Bratton, S. (2005). Effects of culturally responsive child-centered play therapy
            compared to curriculum-based small group counseling with elementary-age Hispanic chil-
            dren referred for behavior problems: A preliminary study. International Journal of Play Therapy,
            14(1), 51–80. doi:10.1037/h0088896                       
          Gil, E., & Drewes, A. (Eds.). (2005).Cultural issues in play therapy. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
          Ginott, H. G. (1961). Group psychotherapy with children: The theory and practice of play therapy.
            Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.                            
          Gonzales, T., & Bratton, S. (in review). Child teacher relationship training (CTRT) as an early
            mentalhealthinterventionforchildrenexhibitingdisruptivebehavior:Anexploratorystudy.
            Manuscript submitted to International Journal of Play Therapy.
          Guerney, B. Jr. (1964). Filial therapy: Description and rationale. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
            28, 304–310.                                             
          Guerney,L.(1983).Client-centered(non-directive)playtherapy.InC.Schaefer&K.O’Connor
            (Eds.), Handbook of play therapy. New York, NY: Wiley.   
          Guerney, L. (2000). Filial therapy into the 21st century. International Journal of Play Therapy,
                                                                     
            9(2), 1–17.                                              
          Guerney, L., & Ryan, V. (2013). Group filial therapy: Training parents to conduct special play sessions
            with their own children (p. 448). London, England: Jessica Kingsley.
          Hambidge, G. (1955). Structured play therapy. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 25, 601–617.
          Helker, W., & Ray, D. (2009). The impact of child-teacher relationship training on teachers’
            and aides’ use of relationship-building skills and the effects on student classroom behavior.
            International Journal of Play Therapy, 18(2), 70–83.     
          Hug-Hellmuth, H. (1920). On the technique of child-analysis. International Journal of Psycho-
            Analysis, 2, 287–305.                                    
          Johnson,S.P.(2001).Short-termplaytherapy.InG.L.Landreth(Ed.),Innovationsinplaytherapy
            (pp. 217–238). Philadelphia, PA: Brunner-Routledge.      
          Klein, M. (1932). The psychoanalysis of children. London, England: Hogarth.
          Knell,S.(2009).Cognitive-behavioralplaytherapy.InK.O’Connor&L.Braverman(Eds.),Play
            therapy theory and practice: Comparing theories and techniques (2nd ed., pp. 203–236). Hoboken,
                                                                     
            NJ: Wiley.                                               
          Kottman, T. (1995). Partners in play: An Adlerian approach to play therapy. Alexandria, VA: Amer-
            ican Counseling Association.                             
          Lambert,S.,LeBlanc,M.,Mullen,J.,Ray,D.,Baggerly,J.,White,J.,&Kaplan,D.(2007).Learn-
            ing more about those who play in session: The national play therapy in counseling practices
            project. Journal of Counseling and Development, 85, 42–46.
          Landreth, G. (1991). Play therapy: The art of the relationship. New York, NY: Brunner-Routledge.
          Landreth, G. (2012). Play therapy: The art of the relationship (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Brunner-
            Routledge.

=== Page 126 (1 cols) ===
112   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Landreth, G., & Bratton, S. (2006). Child parent relationship therapy (CPRT): A 10-session filial
        therapy model. New York, NY: Routledge.                      
      Landreth, G., & Sweeney, D. S. (1999). Child-centered group play therapy. In D. S. Sweeney &
        L. E. Homeyer (Eds.), The handbook of group play therapy: How to do it, how it works, whom it’s
        best for (pp. 39–64). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.        
      Lee, A. C. (2009). Psychoanalytic play therapy. In K. J. O’Connor & L. D. Braverman (Eds.),
        Play therapy theory and practice (pp. 25–82). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
      Levy, D. (1939). Release therapy. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 9, 713–736.
      Lin,Y.,&Bratton,S.(inpress).Ameta-analysisofchild-centeredplaytherapyoutcomeresearch.
        Journal for Counseling and Development.                      
      MacLean, G., & Rappen, U. (1991). Hermine Hug-Hellmuth: Her life and work. New York, NY:
        Routledge.                                                   
      Mearns, D. (2003). Developing person-centered counselling (2nd ed.). London, England: Sage.
      Morrison, M., & Bratton, S. (2010). An early mental health intervention for Head Start pro-
        grams:Theeffectivenessofchild-teacherrelationshiptraining(CTRT)onchildren’sbehavior
        problems. Psychology in the Schools, 47(10), 1003–1017.      
      Morrison, M., & Bratton, S. (2011). The effects of child teacher relationship training on the
        children of focus: A pilot study. International Journal of Play Therapy, 20(4), 193–207.
      Moustakas, C. (1959). Psychotherapy with children: The living relationship. New York, NY: Harper
        & Row.                                                       
      New Freedom Commission on Mental Health. (2003). Achieving the promise: Transforming mental
        health care in America. Final Report. DHHS Pub. No. SMA-03–3832. Rockville, MD: Depart-
        ment of Health and Human Services.                           
      Oaklander, V. (1988). Windows to our children. Highland, NY: Gestalt Journal Press.
      O’Connor, K. (2001). Ecosystemic play therapy. International Journal of Play Therapy, 10(2),
        33–44.                                                       
      Ojiambo, D., & Bratton, S. (2014). Effects of group activity play therapy on the problem behav-
        iors of preadolescent Ugandan orphans. Journal of Counseling and Development, 92, 355–365.
      Packman, J., & Bratton, S. (2003). A school-based group play/activity therapy intervention with
        learning disabled preadolescents exhibiting behavior problems. International Journal of Play
        Therapy, 12, 7–29.                                           
      Perry, B., & Szalavitz, M. (2006). The boy who was raised as a dog: And other stories from a child
        psychiatrist’s notebook. New York, NY: Basic Books.          
      Ray, D. (2011). Advanced play therapy: Essential conditions, knowledge, and skills for child practice.
        New York, NY: Routledge.                                     
      Ray, D., Armstrong, S., Balkin, R., & Jayne, K. (in press). Child centered play therapy in the
        schools: Review and meta-analysis. Psychology in the Schools.
      Ray, D., Blanco, P., Sullivan, J., & Holliman, R. (2009). An exploratory study of child-centered
        play therapy with aggressive children. International Journal of Play Therapy, 18, 162-175.
      Ray, D., & Bratton, S. (2010). What the research shows about play therapy: 21st century
        update. In J. Baggerly, D. Ray, & S. Bratton (Eds.), Child-centered play therapy research: The
        evidence-base for effective practice. New York, NY: John Wiley.

=== Page 127 (1 cols) ===
Play Therapy 113   
                                                                     
          Ray, D., Schottelkorb, A., & Tsai, M. (2007). Play therapy with children exhibiting symptoms
            of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. International Journal of Play Therapy, 16, 95–111.
          Ray,D.,Stulmaker,H.,Lee,K.,&Silverman,W.(2013).Child-centeredplaytherapyandimpair-
            ment: Exploring relationships and constructs. International Journal of Play Therapy, 22(1),
                                                                     
            13–27.                                                   
          Rogers, C. (1942). Counseling and psychotherapy. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
          Rogers, C. (1951). Client-centered therapy: Its current practice, implications and theory. Boston, MA:
            Houghton Mifflin; London, England: Constable.            
          Rogers, C. (1957). The necessary and sufficient conditions of therapeutic personality change.
            Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21(2), 95–103.         
          Rogers,C.(1975).Empathic: Anunappreciated wayofbeing. CounselingPsychologist,5(2),2–11.
          Rogers, C. (1980). A way of being. New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin.
          Ryan, V., & Bratton, S. (2008). Child-centered/non-directive play therapy with very young chil-
            dren.InC.Schaefer,P.Kelly-Zion,&J.McCormick(Eds.),Playtherapywithveryyoungchildren
            (pp. 25–66). New York, NY: Rowman & Littlefield.         
          Schaefer,C.(2001).Prescriptiveplaytherapy. InternationalJournalofPlayTherapy,10(2),57–73.
          Schaefer, C., & Drewes, A. (2014). The therapeutic powers of play and play therapy: 20 core agents
            of change (2nd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.                 
                                                                     
          Sheely-Moore, A., & Bratton, S. (2010). A strengths-based parenting intervention with low
            income African American families. Professional School Counseling, 13(3), 175–183.
          Shen, Y., & Armstrong, S. A. (2008). Impact of group sandtray on the self-esteem of young
            adolescent girls. Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 33(2), 118–137.
          Siegel, D., & Hartzell, M. (2003) Parenting from the inside out: How a deeper self-understanding can
            help you raise children who thrive. New York, NY: Penguin.
          Tolan, J. (2012). Skills in person-centered counselling and psychotherapy. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
          U.S. Public Health Service. (2000). Report of the surgeon general’s conference on children’s mental
            health: A national action agenda. Washington, DC: Author.
          VanFleet, R., Sywulak, A. E., & Sniscak, C. C. (2010). Child-centered play therapy. New York,
            NY: Guilford Press.                                      
          West, J. (1996). Client-centered play therapy (2nd ed.). London, England: Hodder Arnold.
          Wilkins, P. (2010). Person-centered therapy: 100 key points. London, England: Routledge.
          Wilson, K., & Ryan, V. (2005). Play therapy: A non-directive approach for children and adolescents
                                                                     
            (2nd ed.). Oxford, England: Elsevier.                    
          Winnicott, D. W. (1971). Playing and reality. Middlesex, England: Penguin Books.

=== Page 128 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 129 (1 cols) ===
CHAPTER                             
                                   5                                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                     Cognitive-Behavioral                            
                                                                     
                and    Behavioral      Approaches                    
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                        R                                            
                         ICH                                         
                            G                                        
                             ILMAN AND                               
                                     K                               
                                      ATHLEEN                        
                                            C                        
                                             HARD                    
          C   ognitive-behavior therapy (CBT) is a broad classification that incorporates sev-
              eral specific models, many of which are reported in detail elsewhere in this book
          (e.g., Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy, Reality Therapy, Person-Centered Approaches).
          Other models that adopt aspects of CBT include Self-Instructional Training (Meichen-
          baum, 1977), Dialectic Behavior Therapy (Linehan, 1993), and Acceptance and Commit-
          ment Therapy (Hayes, Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999). Although these various models were
          first designed and applied to adults, many of their techniques have been refined and
          modified for use with children and adolescents (see Kendall, 2011). The purpose of this
          chapter is to discuss the use and efficacy of CBT on specific child and adolescent difficul-
          ties. General concepts of CBT are discussed, although primary focus is placed on Beck’s
          Cognitive Behavior Therapy (e.g., A. T. Beck, 1967; J. S. Beck & A. T. Beck, 2011) to
          avoid redundancy with other chapters. We also acknowledge that the literature on CBT
          is vast, with virtually thousands of studies focusing on youth samples. Readers interested
          inunderstandingthenuancesofCBTingeneralarereferredtoWright,Basco,andThase
          (2006), and J. S. Beck (2011). Likewise, readers are referred to Kendall (2011) to learn
          more of CBT as generally applied to children and adolescents.
            A key tenet underlying all CBT models is that individuals’ thoughts, attitudes, and
          perceptions about themselves and others influence their interpretation of an external
          event, and this interpretation subsequently influences a chain of emotional and
          behavioral responses. Factors such as personality, learned history, and access to internal
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                   115

=== Page 130 (1 cols) ===
116   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      (e.g., coping strategies) and external resources (e.g., social supports) have been shown
      to moderate the valence of an experience. For example, students who receive a failing
      grade in a subject will interpret the news based on their previous history of success
      or failure in that subject, the type of support provided by teachers and parents (e.g.,
      supportive versus punitive), personality characteristics (e.g., extraversion versus neu-
      rotic), and how they coped with previous failure in that subject (e.g., adaptive versus
      maladaptive). Students who receive a failing grade but have a poor learning history
      in that subject, less than adequate social support, and a sense of pessimism about that
      subject may view the grade as another indication of their gross incompetence, which
      may elicit strong negative emotions and maladaptive or distorted cognitions (e.g., “I’m
      stupid”; “I always fail at this”)—all of which may contribute to their continued aversion
      to the subject or avoiding it altogether. Conversely, other students receiving the same
      grade but having a positive learning history, strong support by teachers and parents, and
      an optimistic sense of self may be disappointed, but the experience would not likely
      lessen their perceived competence or negatively affect future pursuits in that subject.
      In this regard, cognitive therapists maintain that it is not the event itself but rather the
      cognitive interpretation of an event that establishes the probability for a given affect or
      behavior. Further, the relationship between cognitions, affect, and behaviors is viewed
      as reciprocal rather than linear: The “incompetent” student would most likely avoid
      taking similar subjects in the future, and the absence of further pursuits in that subject
      not only minimizes the probability of eventual success but also reinforces their poor
      self-perceptions in that subject. Given this interaction, both cognitions and behaviors
      are simultaneously targeted in CBT.                            
        Cognitive-behavior therapy seeks to enhance an individual’s awareness of their cog-
      nitive misperceptions (i.e., distortions) and of the behavioral patterns that reinforce and
      are reinforced by these distortions. It is to be emphasized that not every distortion is tar-
      geted for therapy—everyone distorts an aspect of objective reality in some fashion. Only
      distortions that are creating the most distress to individuals and their significant others
      are targeted for intervention. The essential goal of CBT is thus to have the individ-
      ual acquire adaptive coping strategies as well as improve awareness, introspection, and
      evaluation skills.                                             
      HISTORY  AND STATUS                                            
                                                                     
      As a definable paradigm in psychology, CBT is relatively new, although its genesis can
                                                                     
      be found in the writings of Plato, Marcus Aurelius, Emmanuel Kant, and others, all of
      whom viewed reality as a subjective phenomenon based on a series of learned associa-
      tions. The philosophy of CBT is noted in the earliest works in psychology, including
      those of William James (1909), and even early psychoanalytic theory. For example,

=== Page 131 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 117
                                                                     
          Adler believed that the underlying motivation for behaviors was due to an individual’s
          thoughts and emotions surrounding an event, rather than to the event itself (Sperry,
                                                                     
          1997). Given that psychoanalytic theory dominated most of psychological thought in
          the first part of the 20th century, it is not surprising to find that many of the pioneers
          in CBT were first trained as psychoanalysts, including Albert Ellis and Aaron Beck
          (Leahy, 1996).                                             
            Learning theory began to slowly compete with psychoanalytic thought during the
          early-to-middle part of the past century. Beginning in 1920 with the classic study by
          Watson and Rayner (1920), researchers began to view human behavior emanating from
                                                                     
          basic drives and learned behaviors, as opposed to underlying unconscious motives. This
          school of behaviorism flourished in the 1950s due to Dollard and Miller (1951), who
          integrated psychoanalytic theory with learning principles; the publications of B. F. Skin-
          ner (e.g., Skinner, 1953), which demonstrated that learning can be attained through
          stimulus-response methods; and Wolpe’s (1958) application of stimulus-response condi-
          tioning to treat anxiety among adults. Many of these pioneering behavioral techniques
                                                                     
          are still applied today.                                   
            Nevertheless, toward the end of the 1950s, many theorists and researchers questioned
          how psychodynamic and learning theory could adequately explain the complete spec-
          trum of human behavior and motivation. Long-term examination of unconscious drives
          and ego functioning and short-term application of classic and operant behavioral strate-
          giescouldnotfullyaddresscovertbehaviorssuchasobsessions,depression,orgeneralized
          anxiety. During this time, other psychologists also became interested in how individu-
                                                                     
          als construct their worldview through their own perceptions of reality. For example,
          Kelly (1955) asserted that individuals often categorize their experiences into dichoto-
          mous schemas (e.g., “good” versus “bad,” “strong” versus “helpless”), and embracing one
          particularschemaoftenmakesitdifficulttoacceptthealternative(Leahy,1996).Finally,
          researchers in the late 1950s through the following decade also explored how individuals
          processedexternalinformationusingcognitivemediators.Classicworksbypsychologists
          such as Albert Bandura (Bandura, Blanchard, & Ritter, 1969), Arnold Lazarus (1966),
                                                                     
          and Fritz Heider (1958) demonstrated that behaviors can influence and be influenced
          by select cognitions.                                      
            These early works as well as many others served as the conceptual foundation for
          the burgeoning field of CBT, and credit for applying cognitive psychological principles
          to solve clinical problems is often given to Albert Ellis (1962) who asserted that psy-
          chological distress was due to irrational thought distortions such as “I should,” as in “I
                                                                     
          should be liked by everybody.” Other early prominent clinicians and theorists included
          Donald Meichenbaum (1977), who used CBT to modify distorted thought patterns
          and stressful environmental influences; Martin Seligman and colleagues (Abramson,
          Seligman, & Teasdale, 1978; Seligman, 1975), who applied CBT to develop a model

=== Page 132 (1 cols) ===
118   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      of depression labeled learned helplessness; and Michael Mahoney (1974), who applied
      cognitive-behavioral principles to enhance self-control. Perhaps the most comprehen-
      sive model of CBT (and certainly one of the most influential) is based on the work of
      Aaron Beck (1967), who initially used CBT to work with adults suffering depression. In
      the past four decades, Beck’s version of CBT has been used to explain and treat many
      forms of psychological distress among both adults and youth.   
      OVERVIEW  OF THEORY                                            
      Basic Theory and Assumptions                                   
      As noted earlier, cognitive-behavioral therapy draws on cognitive, behavioral, psy-
      chodynamic, humanistic, and biopsychosocial theories. In addition, CBT for youth
      incorporates learning and developmental theories, acknowledging the importance of
      the impact of the individual’s developmental level of self-control, social cognition,
      learning and memory, metacognitive skills, and attributions on treatment. Regardless
      of age group, Dobson and Dozois (2001) noted that all CBT models share three
      fundamental assumptions:                                       
         1. Cognitive activity affects behavior. Cognitive-behavioral therapists believe that a
                                                                     
           client’s cognitive appraisal of events can affect their response (e.g., behaviors) to
           the events.                                               
         2. Cognitive activity may be monitored and altered. This global assumption contains
           two underlying assumptions. First, the therapist and client have access to the
           client’s thoughts. Second, once all cognitions are explored, the client is better
           prepared to modify or change some of the more problematic (or distorted) ones.
         3. Desired behavior change may be created through cognitive change. Borrowing from
                                                                     
           Mahoney’s (1974) mediational model, modifying distorted cognitions alone
           changes the clients’ interpretation of events, which in turn increases the
           probability that their behaviors will be altered in response to this new interpre-
           tation. This assumption does not dismiss the belief that overt reinforcement
           contingencies can alter performance (e.g., the use of tangible reinforcers to
           shape new and desired behaviors), but suggests that cognitive restructuring can
           be an equally valid method to create meaningful and lasting behavior change.
                                                                     
        Given these assumptions, the task of the cognitive-behavioral therapist is thus to
                                                                     
      help the clients (1) become aware of their distorted cognitions, (2) identify the way
      these distorted cognitions are related to the clients’ negative feelings and behaviors,
      and (3) modify their distorted thinking and maladaptive behavior patterns, both of
      which have heretofore reinforced and maintained their negative view of self and others.

=== Page 133 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 119
                                                                     
          In successfully completing these tasks, it is assumed that individuals will perceive and
          react differently to events, thus leading to less psychological distress and a more positive
                                                                     
          life outlook.                                              
            It should be mentioned that not all psychotherapies are considered to be in the
          cognitive-behavioral paradigm. Given that targeting cognitive distortions is the
          hallmark characteristic of CBT models, therapeutic modalities that exclude exploring
          and/or challenging cognitive distortions would not be labeled as CBT. For example,
          therapies that use behavior principles but do not contain an active cognitive mediation
          component (e.g., habit reversal) would not be classified as CBT. Similarly, therapies
                                                                     
          that focus on processing negative affect but exclude exploring and challenging related
          distorted thoughts (e.g., emotional catharsis models) also would not be considered as a
          CBT per se.                                                
                                                                     
          View of Psychopathology                                    
          Cognitive-behavioral theorists believe that human beings are not always accurate in
                                                                     
          their cognitive interpretations of events, and these distortions can be based on psycho-
          logical, social/cultural, biological, and genetic factors (A. T. Beck, 2008; Dowd, 2003;
          Muris & Field, 2008). For the most part, such distortions are universal, relatively benign,
          and in many cases key to healthy functioning and life quality. For example, there is
          some evidence to suggest that maintaining unrealistic but positive views of self and
          others (i.e., positive illusions) may be a protective barrier against severe illness (e.g.,
          Taylor, Lerner, Sherman, Sage, & McDowell, 2003), an important component of pos-
                                                                     
          itive romantic relationships (Gordon, Johnson, Heimberg, Montesi, & Fauber, 2013),
          and may be an important coping mechanism among children with learning difficulties
          (Heath, Roberts, & Toste, 2013). Nevertheless, there are occasions when the cognitive
          distortions become so skewed that they significantly and negatively interfere with an
          individual’s adaptive functioning across important life domains. It is on these occasions
          that various forms of psychopathology are observed.        
                                                                     
            Cognitive-behavioral therapists who assume A. T. Beck’s (1967) perspective focus on
          distortions surrounding the clients’ sense of themselves, their environment, and their
          future (often referred to as the cognitive triad). For many psychiatric disorders, distortions
          can be noted across each component in the triad. For example, individuals who are
          depressed often perceive themselves as lacking personal competence, view their past and
          current failures as continued evidence of their incompetence, and place little hope on a
          pleasant future. Individuals who are anxious often view themselves as unable to handle
                                                                     
          their distress, perceive elements in their immediate and distal environment as dangerous
          and threatening, and view their future with fear and apprehension. Finally, individuals
          with externalizing disorders (e.g., conduct disorder) often view (a) themselves as being
          treated unfairly or abused in some way, (b) others as unfair or interfering with their

=== Page 134 (1 cols) ===
120   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      personal goals, and (c) any future goals as inevitably being impeded by others (Alford &
      Beck, 1997).                                                   
      GENERAL  THERAPEUTIC  GOALS AND  TECHNIQUES                    
      Given their conceptualization of psychopathology, cognitive-behavioral therapies are
      largely organized into three different categories: (1) coping skills therapies, (2) cogni-
      tive restructuring therapies, and (3) problem-solving therapies. Coping skills therapies
      focus less on changing cognitive interpretations of events and more on developing and
      practicing behavioral strategies and skills (e.g., use of relaxation strategies or assertive
      skills) to help the client deal with stressful situations. In contrast, cognitive restruc-
      turing therapies focus on modifying and replacing maladaptive cognitions with adaptive
      thoughtpatterns,withrelativelylittlefocusonskillacquisition.Finally,problem-solving
      therapies can be viewed as a combination of the earlier approaches, with the goal being
      to simultaneously modify the client’s maladaptive thoughts and create strategies that
      promote positive behavior change. A majority of contemporary CBT models fall into
      the problem-solving category.                                  
        Each CBT session typically follows an established framework, although the content
      in each session will change from person to person depending on the referral problem.
      Each session emphasizes a collaborative problem-solving approach that requires both
      partiestobeactivelyinvolved.Inaddition,theclientisoftenremindedthatthetherapist
      should not be viewed as the “keeper of the answers.” Instead, all beliefs and perceptions
      are tested through a process labeled collaborative empiricism, whereby a situation experi-
      enced by the client is tested against the clients’ interpretations of their self, worldview,
      and future. Using the example of the children who receive a failing grade and perceive
      themselves as incompetent in that subject, the therapist will help the children test their
      interpretation of the event against competing and supporting evidence (e.g., Was there
      ever an occasion when the youth received a passing grade in that subject? Has the youth
      always done poorly in that subject?), and against each element in the cognitive triad
                                                                     
      (e.g., How important is the subject to the child’s sense of self? How accurate are the
      children’s perceptions that there are little positive social support when they fail? How
      entrenched is their belief that they will never receive a passing grade in that subject?).
      Keywords such as always (“I always fail this subject”), never (“I’ll never pass”), and should
       (“I should just quit school”) are listened for and immediately attended to by the therapist
       during the course of the discussion.                          
                                                                     
        Each session also follows a sequential procedure that further strengthens the alliance
       between the client and the therapist. If the treatment is manualized, the agenda will
       be somewhat more structured than nonmanualized approaches, but in both cases there
       is room for flexibility. The first step is setting the agenda, or a discussion of what will be

=== Page 135 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 121
                                                                     
          covered during the session. The second step is a review of the client’s homework assignment
          that was given in the prior session, which is designed to have the client practice skills in
                                                                     
          vivo. Impediments toward completingthe homework are examinedand addressed if nec-
          essary. This review is often followed by goal setting, or what the client should expect from
          the current session. After goal setting, a new skill is taught and practiced. This skill is often
          based on what was learned in prior sessions and is conveyed through didactic teaching,
          role-playing, and other methods. After the main treatment material has been covered
          the therapists ask for feedback, which allows the therapists to adjust their approach and
          methods for working with the client. Therapists also are encouraged to give feedback to
                                                                     
          their clients as a way to (a) build the therapeutic relationship, (b) give positive encour-
          agement, and (c) address particularly distorted cognitions (Wright, Basco, & Thase,
          2006). Finally, homework is again assigned to the clients, which allows the clients to test
          their hypothesis regarding their perceptions of real-life events and whether these per-
          ceptions should be modified based on what was practiced in session. These homework
          assignmentsare acollaborativeendeavor,wherethe therapistandthe clientdiscusswhat
          assignment would be most helpful to work on until the next session.
                                                                     
            Finally,althoughnotnecessarilyafocusofeverysession,afinalpartoftheCBTframe-
          work is generalization and relapse prevention. Generalization is often used throughout the
          course of therapy to help the clients apply their newfound skills to a variety of situations,
          not just specific issues they initially brought with them into therapy. For example, chil-
          dren who learn to modify their cognitions and behaviors when receiving a failing grade
          in one academic subject would learn to do the same with other subjects. Relapse preven-
                                                                     
          tion typically occurs toward the end of therapy and focuses on identifying posttreatment
          impediments. Once these impediments are labeled, the therapist and the client brain-
          storm ways in which they can be addressed (e.g., role-play) to practice alternative ways
          of responding.                                             
                                                                     
                                                                     
          COMMON  COGNITIVE-BEHAVIOR  THERAPY  TECHNIQUES            
                                                                     
          Therapists will often rely on a number of specific techniques that can be used alone or
          in conjunction with others. The following is a review of some of the most commonly
          reported techniques.                                       
                                                                     
          Socratic Questioning                                       
          Socratic questioning is perhaps the most widely known and employed CBT technique.
                                                                     
          In this form of questioning, the therapist feigns ignorance to elicit the client’s complete
          knowledge on a particular topic. Incomplete or inaccurate ideas can then be corrected
          during follow-up questioning, which can help correct a client’s misinterpretations and
          can lead to more realistic thought processes.

=== Page 136 (1 cols) ===
122   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Problem Solving                                                
      Clients often have numerous difficulties that may or may not be related to the initial
      referral problem. During problem solving, which is usually done in the first session,
      the client and therapist create a problem list that is described in clear, concrete, and
      goal-orientedlanguage.Duringsubsequentsessions,thetherapistaskstheclientwhether
      any new problems have developed that should be added to the list. Initially, the ther-
      apist designs problem-solving strategies for the clients, but over time the clients are
      encouraged and expected to assume a more active role and generate their own strate-
      gies. Didactic instruction of components that comprise adaptive problem-solving skills
      is often first necessary for many clients, particularly young children. For other clients
      who have good problem-solving skills but are hesitant to apply the strategies, the ther-
      apist and client focus on the client’s perceptions that hinder the strategy from being
      implemented. Various techniques such as Socratic questioning, using a problem-solving
      worksheet, and role-playing are often employed in this case.   
      Cognitive Restructuring                                        
      Cognitive restructuring is an umbrella term for a variety of cognitive-based techniques
      designed to reduce, modify, or replace a client’s cognitive distortions. Some techniques
      have the therapist directly challenging and refuting the client’s distortion, whereas oth-
      ers involve a more collaborative relationship by having both the therapist and client
      examine the logic of the client’s perception and systematically testing its veracity. For
      example, the therapist and the client may examine via a problem-solving worksheet the
      “evidence for and evidence against” perceptions held by the client. As another example,
      clients are asked to complete a sheet containing separate columns specific to an event,
      their thoughts regarding the event, and their corresponding feelings. The sheet is com-
      pleted outside of the session and discussed later with the therapist, which helps the client
      understand the causal connections between the three columns. In time, and once the
      client understands these relationships, an additional fourth column is added to the sheet,
      and the client is instructed to provide an alternative interpretation of an experienced
      event, or one that is different than how they would normally interpret the event.
                                                                     
                                                                     
      Self-Monitoring and Self-Regulation                            
      Self-monitoring requires the clients to keep a log that records their cognitions, affect,
      and behaviors in response to online events. In addition, the clients briefly describe sit-
                                                                     
      uational variables that precede these reactions. As the clients understand the context
      around their distorted thinking, they are taught an adaptive response to use in response
      to their reactions. For example, when a student with test anxiety becomes aware of their

=== Page 137 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 123
                                                                     
          distress (i.e., they become aware of physiological markers as well as their corresponding
          cognitive distortions), the act of recording this distress serves as a cue to initiate adap-
                                                                     
          tive coping strategies (e.g., relaxation exercises, deep breathing). Another technique is
          self-regulation, where clients compare the number of recorded times that they reverted
          backtotheirmaladaptivecognitionsandbehaviorsagainstthenumberoftimesthatthey
          used adaptive cognitive and behavior strategies. Should the outcome exceed a predeter-
          mined goal or standard, the client is self-reinforced and/or reinforced by the therapist
          and others.                                                
                                                                     
          Affective Education or Mindfulness                         
                                                                     
          In affective education or mindfulness training, clients are taught to become cognizant
          of their emotions, to see their emotions as cues to their cognitive distortions and mal-
          adaptive behaviors, and to realize that their emotions do not always need to be acted
          on. Many clients (including children) have a difficult time identifying and labeling
          their emotions, knowing how to appropriately respond to certain emotions, or realizing
                                                                     
          that their emotions directly stem from their cognitions. In affective education, clients
          are taught to identify and label their emotions and to recognize the breadth of emo-
          tional responses (rather than simple dyadic labels such as happy/sad). Second, clients
          learn that extreme emotional responses can interfere with logical thinking and that they
          have the option of responding to a situation before their emotions become too extreme.
          Role-playing or modeling exercises are often practiced in session, which helps clients
          learn how to best cope with their emotions in real life and in frequently experienced
                                                                     
          situations. In mindfulness training, the client understands that emotions do not always
          require a behavioral or cognitive reaction and sometimes it is permissible to accept the
          feeling as part of the human condition without doing anything. As part of mindfulness
          training, some therapists will enlist the use of meditation exercises or tapes that focus
          on either clearing the mind or on blocking out external stimuli, which allows clients to
          become more aware of their internal thoughts and feelings. 
                                                                     
          Relaxation Training                                        
                                                                     
          Many clients report a significant reduction in their internal distress by learning and
          practicing a variety of exercises, ranging from deep and slow diaphragmatic breathing
          combined with repeating a simple word (e.g., “relax”), to more complex and sequential
          muscle relaxation procedures. Some clients who have experienced trauma or who are
          highly anxious report that relaxation training actually heightens their level of anxiety,
                                                                     
          thus the therapist should consider introducing these techniques as an experiment that
          may cause relaxation or may lead to anxious thoughts. In the latter case, the client learns
          and practices other techniques described in this section to reduce their anxiety.

=== Page 138 (1 cols) ===
124   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Modeling and Role-Playing                                      
      Modeling and role-playing are two techniques commonly used with clients, especially
      with children and their parents. In modeling, the therapist displays an appropriate
      behavior for the child to replicate or, in some cases, works with the parents to ensure
      that they are modeling positive behaviors for their child to learn and imitate. In
      role-playing, the child and the therapist actually enact a situation and the child
      practices a newly learned and perhaps more appropriate behavior. For example, if
      children are having difficulties being assertive in class, the therapist might role-play the
      teacher and ask the children to practice raising their hand and responding when called
      on. Role-playing can help to decrease the emotion attached to the situation and allow
      children to feel more secure in trying the new behavior outside of the session.
      Exposure Therapy or Imagery                                    
      Exposure therapy (ET) is commonly used when the client has developed a fear of some
      stimuli; a reaction commonly found in individuals with specific phobias, obsessive
      compulsive disorder, or posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Prior to ET, the clients
      rate their initial or “baseline” level of distress using the Subjective Units of Distress
      Scale (SUDS). Through imagery or in vivo exercises, the client is gradually exposed
      to anxiety-evoking stimuli for longer periods of time. Imaginal exposure typically takes
      place in the therapist’s office with the clients imagining they are interacting with the
      stimuli. For instance, the clients may simply imagine that they are sitting in a classroom
      if they have a fear of school. Often used in conjunction with imaginal exposure, in vivo
      exposure requires the client to be in the presence of the feared stimuli, with the level of
      exposure gradually increasing. For example, in the case of school phobia, the client may
      first sit in a car in front of the school, followed by sitting in the car and driving to school,
      followed by having the child sit in an empty classroom for 30 minutes, and finally by
      having the client sit in a full classroom. During each condition, the clients are taught
      to monitor their SUDS rating and to stay in the exposure until their rating drops to
      some predetermined level. In vivo exposure teaches the clients that the stimuli will not
      hurt them and that they can become safely accustomed to interacting with the stimuli.
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
      APPLICATIONS  WITH CHILDREN                                    
      Identical to adults, the aims of CBT for children are to help them identify their most
                                                                     
      problematic cognitive distortions, test these distortions in session under the guidance of
      a therapist and outside the session through homework assignments, and develop more
      rational thinking. Nevertheless, unlike adults, developmental factors must be consid-
      ered when implementing CBT, especially among young (i.e., preadolescent) children.

=== Page 139 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 125
                                                                     
          Three factors are specifically mentioned. First, Piagetian theory asserts that the capacity
          to form abstract and self-reflective thoughts is only consistently attained at later stages
                                                                     
          of development. Although it is now generally felt that Piaget may have underestimated
          the ability of younger children to process abstract material (Meadows, 1993; Rochat,
          1995), there is enough empirical evidence to indicate that young children (i.e., under
          age 8) maintain only rudimentary higher order reasoning skills (see Grave & Blissett,
          2004; Miller, 2009). Given that CBT requires individuals to be aware of their cognitive
          distortions and that they must have the capacity to understand the relationship between
          cognitions, affect, and behaviors, these higher order cognitive processes may be beyond
                                                                     
          the reasoning abilities of most young children. For example, in Beck’s cognitive therapy
          for depression (A. T. Beck, 1967), it is assumed that individuals have the capability to
          distinguish rational from irrational thoughts once they are identified in session. Never-
          theless, young children may not understand this distinction, and distorted thinking is in
          fact both a hallmark of early childhood and a product of normal development (Shirk,
          1998). Thus, it is important that CBT practitioners understand characteristics that typ-
                                                                     
          ify normal and abnormal development and should be aware of the limitations of applying
          CBT with young children.                                   
            Second, care must be taken to avoid the “developmental uniformity myth” (Kendall
          & Choudhury, 2003), where children at different ages exhibiting the same behavior
          problems are assumed to be alike. Cognitive, social, and affective variables all contribute
          to children’s self-perceptions and their views of others, and the complexity of these
          relationships increase with age. Although CBT may be effective for one young child,
                                                                     
          developmental growth in (a) language development, (b) memory skills, and (c) behav-
          ioral skills such as self-regulation varies for each child and thus precludes assuming that
          CBT will work with every child in an age group. Selection of specific CBT techniques
          (when appropriate) must incorporate each child’s unique strengths and limitations.
            Finally, the therapist should be aware of the various ways in which youth often come
          to therapy, and how these reasons may differ as a function of the child’s age. Although
          adults primarily self-refer to treatment, youth (particularly young children) are most
                                                                     
          often referred to therapy by adults (e.g., parent, guardians, teachers). There may be
          instances when the child’s behaviors are symptomatic of larger problems in the family
          that would not necessarily be ameliorated through individual CBT alone. The level and
          typeofinvolvementoffamilymembersinachild’streatmentcanhaveadramaticimpact
          on the success of the therapy (Field & Duchoslav, 2009; Kazdin, Holland, & Crowley,
          1997), and for this reason there has been increased emphasis on including parents or
                                                                     
          guardians in CBT treatment models for children.            
            AlthoughCBThasbeencriticizedforitsfailuretorecognizeimportantdevelopmental
          differencesthat may mediate the success of CBT (Stallard, 2009), research indicates that
          modified approaches for young children, including using (a) less complex, verbally based

=== Page 140 (1 cols) ===
126   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      techniques, (b) parents to reinforce concepts practiced in sessions, (c) play therapy to
      communicate concepts, and (d) more behaviorally active learning techniques can lead
      to improvements in both cognitive reframing and problematic behaviors (Minde, Roy,
      Bezonsky, & Hashemi, 2010). Some of the most common child difficulties that have
      been addressed through CBT are described.                      
      Depression                                                     
      Most CBT treatments are based on the assumption that depression is caused and main-
      tained through faulty cognitions and maladaptive coping behaviors. Thus, modifications
      of the child’s cognitions, affect, and behaviors are targeted simultaneously. General tech-
      niques among young children include first teaching the children to understand the dis-
      tinction between their thoughts and feelings through didactic teaching, role-playing,
      and mutual storytelling, all of which are then practiced during weekly homework assign-
      ments (typically by having the children complete depression logs). Once the children
      understand this distinction, the children and the therapist discuss occasions and activi-
      ties that elicit positive and negative moods, and the therapist helps the children under-
      stand how their thoughts may have influenced their behaviors. Concurrent behavioral
      techniquesthatareoftenemployedincludehavingthechildcontinuetoengageinpleas-
      ant activities, and teaching social problem, assertion, or social interaction skills when
      the child is engaged in unpleasant (or depression-inducing) activities. In addition, cog-
      nitive restructuring activities are practiced both during the session and throughout the
      week. Such activities include having the children set appropriate goals (i.e., goals that
      can be readily attained), identify their distorted cognitions (which typically focus on the
      cognitive triad), and learn to replace these distortions with more adaptive and construc-
      tive thought processes. Finally, affect management skills include relaxation during times
      of stress and other impulse control techniques.                
        Some single-case and multigroup studies illustrate how various CBT techniques can
      be applied to children. For example, Asarnow and Carlson (1988) applied CBT with a
      10-year-old female living in an inpatient setting for severe depression. The first week of
      treatment involved having the child rate her mood on a 1 to 5 scale (ranging from happy
      to sad). The child and therapist then reviewed when she was feeling happiest and fac-
      tors that contributed to this positive affect. (Gradually, the rating form was expanded to
      include columns where the child could rate her thoughts, feelings, and behaviors during
      all activities.) Concurrent to this, the therapist worked with the child to examine links
      between her mood states, cognitions, and activities. As the sessions progressed, contin-
                                                                     
      ued identification of dysfunctional cognitions (both in session and throughout the week)
      and replacement of maladaptive coping strategies with adaptive problem-solving skills
      were taught and practiced. Role-playing exercises and homework assignments were stan-
      dard techniques. Pharmacotherapy was also used as an intervention during admission,

=== Page 141 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 127
                                                                     
          but was discontinued at discharge. Results found significant short-term and long-term
          improvements in the child’s mood with no relapse. Further, Stark, Reynolds, and Kaslow
                                                                     
          (1987) evaluated two separate CBT approaches with 39 children diagnosed with mod-
          erate depression. The first approach consisted of the following strategies across a 5-week
          time span:                                                 
                                                                     
            Sessions 1 to 4: Children were taught to self-monitor their thoughts and mood when
               participating in pleasant activities (through the use of log sheets).
            Session 5: Children were taught to monitor the long-term rather than the immediate
                                                                     
               consequences of their actions.                        
            Sessions 6 to 7: Children were taught to replace maladaptive attributions with more
               adaptive attributions.                                
            Sessions 8 to 9: Children were taught to replace unrealistic expectations with more
               realistic standards when evaluating their performance.
            Sessions 10 to 12: Children were taught to increase their level of self-reinforcement
               (using both overt and covert methods) and to reduce the amount of self-
                                                                     
               punishment when evaluating their performance. The final portion of Session 12
               was a review of the skills that were taught.          
                                                                     
            The second approach included these same activities but also included problem solv-
          ing in social situations and a discussion of the relationship between their maladaptive
          thoughts and behaviors and how these may negatively affect their social relations. The
                                                                     
          results found that both treatment conditions yielded significant improvement on depres-
          sion scores, in comparison to a wait-list control group. Follow-up studies that combined
          both methods into a multicomponent CBT intervention found that in comparison to
          a nonspecific psychotherapy control group, children in the CBT group reported signifi-
          cantly fewer depressive symptoms and fewer distorted cognitions.
                                                                     
          Anxiety Disorders                                          
                                                                     
          The more frequently cited CBT intervention for anxiety disorders is based on the work
          of Phillip Kendall’s Coping Cat program (e.g., Kendall, 1990), who incorporated five
          components into a multicomponent program:                  
                                                                     
            1. Psychoeducation (having the child understand information about anxiety and
              the feared stimuli).                                   
                                                                     
            2. Somatic management skills training (targeting arousal and other physiological
              responses).                                            
            3. Cognitive restructuring (identifying cognitive distortions and replacing them
              with more adaptive coping thoughts).

=== Page 142 (1 cols) ===
128   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
         4. Exposure methods (controlled exposure to fearful stimulus).
         5. Relapse prevention plans (generalizing the treatment gains over time; Albano,
           Chorpita, & Kendall, 1996).                               
        The treatment consists of approximately 14 to 18 sessions over a 12- to 16-week
      period, with each session lasting approximately 1 hour. A review of the program can
      be found in Hudson and Kendall (2002) and Kendall (1994), but in brief, the treatment
      is based on five specific principles, whereby children:        
         1. Learntorecognizeanxiousfeelingsandphysiologicalreactionsrelatedtoanxiety.
         2. Identify (with the help of the therapist) their unrealistic expectations and dis-
           torted cognitions in anxiety-provoking situations.        
         3. Develop a plan to help them cope with anxiety-producing situations.
         4. Are gradually exposed to the anxiety-provoking stimuli or situations.
         5. Evaluate their performance by using self-reinforcement (rather than self-
           punishment or negative self-talk) strategies.             
        Specific CBT techniques include modeling, imaginal and in vivo exposure, role-
      playing, relaxation training, and contingent reinforcement. Homework tasks are also
      assigned and specific techniques are practiced to avoid relapse prevention. In addition
      to individual therapy, parents are also often involved through direct (i.e., participation
      in the treatment plan) or indirect (i.e., consultation) methods. The first half of the
                                                                     
      program is designed to teach the child the new skills, while the remaining half focuses
      on having the child practice the skills both in session and in vivo. Empirical studies
      of the Coping Cat program consistently demonstrate its effectiveness in alleviating
      short- and long-term anxiety symptoms (e.g., Barrett, Duffy, Dadds, & Rapee, 2001;
      Kendall, 1994).                                                
        Other CBT therapies aside from the Coping Cat program have also demonstrated
      their effectiveness in lessening anxiety among very young children. For example, Minde
                                                                     
      et al. (2010) reported that CBT can successfully manage anxiety symptoms among chil-
      dren as young as 3 years of age by involving parenting in the curriculum. Specifically,
      among a sample of 37 young children (between the ages of 3 and 8) referred to a univer-
      sityclinicspecializinginanxietyproblems,participantsspent40minuteslearninghowto
      reframe their worries, how to develop more appropriate coping skills by “talking back” to
      their negative thoughts, and choose a specific goal to shoot for during the week. Parents
                                                                     
      then attended the final portion of the session with their child (20 minutes) to receive
      feedback on the session, to further learn about anxiety disorders, and to discuss how
      they can help their child successfully attain their weekly goal. Results yielded significant
      reductions in anxiety symptoms, based on parent- and teacher-reports, as well as better

=== Page 143 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 129
                                                                     
          adaptive functioning (per clinician report). Likewise, Monga, Young, and Owens (2009)
          demonstrated that CBT can be successfully applied in group-format to alleviate anxiety
                                                                     
          symptomsamongyoungchildren.Among32children(betweentheagesof5and7)diag-
          nosed with anxiety disorder, the authors developeda manualizedtreatment protocol that
          had children recognize various feeling states, learn relaxation strategies when placed in
          anxiety-provoking situations, and developing alternative patterns of thoughts (“brave
          thoughts”) when they become aware of their anxiety. In addition, parents participated
          in concurrent sessions where they received information about anxiety and learned the
          strategies that were being taught to their child. Results of the group intervention found
                                                                     
          that after 12 weeks, more than 40% of the participants no longer met criteria for any
          anxiety disorder, and 72% had at least one anxiety disorder resolved with treatment.
                                                                     
          Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder                              
          Most CBT interventions involve teaching children to recognize and relabel their intru-
          sive and distressing thoughts, and to reexamine the likelihood that the fearful conse-
                                                                     
          quence will actually occur if the obsession is not acted on. Techniques for young children
          include providing information regarding the disorder, establishing a behavioral rewards
          system for treatment compliance (including direct family involvement), and teaching
          appropriate metaphors to facilitate cognitive restructuring (Piacentini, 1999). In some
          forms of CBT—especially in cases that do not involve moral guilt or pathological doubt,
          exposure to cues that elicit the obsessive thought is often used, which also requires
          having the child wait for at least an hour before demonstrating the typical ritualistic
                                                                     
          behavior (Rappaport & Inoff-Germain, 2000). Although studies to investigate the effi-
          cacy of CBT for children with OCD have been few, there is enough evidence to suggest
          that the intervention yields significant reduction in obsessive and compulsive symp-
          toms, with treatment gains noted up to 3 months post-treatment (Williams, Salkovskis,
          Forrester, Turner, White, & Allsopp, 2010).                
            Piacentini and Langley (2004) reported a case-study of a 12-year-old Asian-American
          male who exhibited obsessions on themes surrounding contamination of himself and
                                                                     
          others. Ritual behaviors surrounding these thoughts included excessive hand-washing
          and constant reassurance from his parents. Symptoms were first noted at age 8 and began
          to interfere with daily and social functioning at age 10. The course of treatment included
          the following components:                                  
                                                                     
          Psychoeducation                                            
                                                                     
          The child and his parents received information on OCD, which served to reduce the
          feelings of stigma, anger, and blame surrounding the disorder. The information also
          helped the child understand that he was not the only person to have the problem.
          Presentation of OCD as a neurobehavioral disorder helped reduce family conflict, and

=== Page 144 (1 cols) ===
130   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      a rationale for the use of CBT was provided to prepare the family and the child for the
      selected treatment techniques.                                 
      Cognitive Restructuring                                        
      The child was taught to recognize and relabel his obsessive thoughts and feelings in a
      more realistic fashion. He also learned to test his fear hypotheses using a “fear thermome-
      ter,” a simple measure that was used to estimate the probability that a feared outcome
      would actually occur. Constructive coping statements were also learned during the ses-
      sion and practiced throughout the week (via established homework assignments).
      Exposure Plus Response Prevention                              
      The therapist encouraged the child to have contact with the feared stimulus and to resist
      conducting ritual behaviors over the course of the exposure period. Fear thermometer
      ratings were assessed every 30 to 60 seconds at the trial outset and then less frequently as
      the duration of the exposure increased. The ratings were graphed so that the child could
      see his progress throughout the course of treatment.           
      Addressing Obsessions                                          
      The child’s obsessions were also addressed by having him (a) write his thoughts or images
      on a log, (b) describe these thoughts or images aloud to the therapist, (c) listen as the
      therapist read his thoughts back to the child, and eventually (d) create silly songs or
      other humorous creations out of his thoughts. These activities served to normalize the
                                                                     
      obsessions, thereby reducing their discomfort and frequency of occurrence.
      Family Intervention                                            
                                                                     
      In addition to psychoeducation, the family was taught to attribute the OCD symptoms
      to the disorder itself rather than to the child. The family was also instructed how to
      disengage from the child’s OCD behaviors, which helped develop more normal patterns
      of family interaction.                                         
                                                                     
        The results found that after 12 sessions, a significant decrease in OCD symptoms was
      noted (as evidenced by self, family, and peer reports). The child reported that he was
      abletofunctioninsocialactivitieswithoutworryingabouthisobsessions,andsignificant
      gains in adaptive coping skills were noted.                    
        Recent studies also have applied CBT to even younger children diagnosed with OCD.
      For example, Choate-Summers et al. (2008) reported the results of a family-based pro-
                                                                     
      tocol among 42 children between the ages of 5 and 8 who were referred for treatment
      at university-based anxiety disorders clinics. Highlights of the 12-session, weekly inter-
      vention included (a) providing the children and their parents with “tools” to understand
      and identify OCD symptoms, (b) psychoeducation to parents prior to the child entering

=== Page 145 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 131
                                                                     
          treatment, (c) exposure training within the context of developmental play, and (d) for-
          mal parent training to help parents learn tools to help their child cope with their OCD
                                                                     
          symptoms. Results of the intervention were positive, with 62% of treatment completers
          achieving clinical remission of symptoms (in comparison to 20% of children placed in
          an active control condition).                              
                                                                     
          Social Phobia                                              
          Although once thought to be a temporary condition that children could outgrow or due
                                                                     
          to a personality characteristic (i.e., being shy), social phobia (SP) has drawn clinical
          interest given that its prevalence is approximately 6% to 8% of youth (Chavira, Stein,
          Bailey, & Stein, 2005; Mancini, Van Ameringen, & Bennett, 2005). Fears of public
          speaking, reading, writing, or eating are common, which can induce physical symptoms
          of anxiety (e.g., blushing, shaking, stomachaches), and specific symptoms may extend
          alongdevelopmentallines.Forexample,youngchildrenwithSPmaydemonstratesymp-
          toms such as throwing a temper tantrum, crying, or shrinking from unfamiliar people,
                                                                     
          while older youth may develop avoidance from settings or situations, or “playing the
          class clown” to avoid their anxiety (DeWit, Ogborne, & Offord, 1999). Social phobia
          often precedes other mood disorders such as generalized anxiety disorder and depres-
          sion (Rapee & Spence, 2004) and thus improving the symptoms related to SP may help
          improve the symptoms of other shared conditions.           
            Traditional treatment of SP involves the use of behavioral techniques (e.g.,
          guided imagery and in vivo exposure to the fear stimulus), systematic desensitization,
                                                                     
          and contingency management. However, more recent conceptualizations take a
          cognitive-behavior perspective, where children process socially relevant information in
          an excessively negative and feared manner. Exposure to the feared stimulus serves to
          maintain the phobia. Hirsch and Clark (2004), for example, outline several explana-
          tions for how individuals view social interactions as threatening, including (a) making
          excessively negative predictions about future events, (b) interpreting ongoing social
                                                                     
          events negatively, (c) selectively retrieving negative information regarding past social
          events, (d) having distorted negative images regarding their own social competency,
          (e) showing reduced processing of social cues, and (f) tending to negatively focus on
          and interpret information in social cues. Cognitive-behavioral therapy techniques thus
          focus on having individuals review the likelihood that a negative event would occur
          in the future and reappraise their memories of previous social situations and teaching
          more adaptive and reasonable appraisals when in current social situations. Methods
                                                                     
          used to teach these techniques include psychoeducation (i.e., teaching children
          about their phobia, and exploring the cognitive distortions underlying the phobia),
          social skills training, cognitive restructuring, relaxation training, and for many youth,
          gradual exposure. Among younger children, some of these techniques may be modified.

=== Page 146 (1 cols) ===
132   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      For example, Miller and Feeny (2003) modified the use of CBT for a 5-year-old female
      with SP by also including novel exposure techniques and including parents in the
      treatment design to promote generalization outside of the therapy session.
        Most of the studies to demonstrate the efficacy of CBT for SP among children are
      based on case studies, with results reporting remission of most problematic symptoms
      for up to 1 year. Spence, Donovan, and Brechman-Toussaint (2000) investigated the
      efficacy of an integrated CBT procedure for a group of children (ages 7 to 11) and
      adolescents (ages 12 to 14) who were diagnosed with SP. Each session lasted for 1 hour,
      followed by a 30-minute period of social games where the participants practiced newly
      learned skills under the guidance of the therapist. Specific components that were
      taught included social skills, relaxation techniques, social problem solving, positive
      self-instruction, graded exposure, and (among older youth) cognitive challenging.
      Corresponding skills for the components included:              
      Social Skills Training                                         
      Basic skills that were taught included maintaining eye contact, positive affect, and an
      even tone and volume of voice. These skills were integrated in more complex social
      behavior skills such as verbal attending and conversation skills. Following these skills,
      specific friendship skills were taught and practiced, such as sharing, inviting others to
      play, and giving compliments.                                  
      Problem-Solving Skills                                         
      Children were taught to use the “Social Detective Technique” when coping with chal-
      lenging situations (e.g., being bullied or teased) or when the children needed to be more
      assertive in social situations. “Detect” involved having the child stop and assess exactly
      what the problem was. “Investigate” involved having the child relax, brainstorm alter-
      native solutions and potential outcomes, and choose the best solution of the list. Further,
      older children were taught to both test the evidence surrounding their thought distor-
                                                                     
      tions and explore alternative and more adaptive thoughts. The authors noted that young
      children had a difficult time challenging their cognitions or understanding how to test
      the evidence for and against their perceptions. Thus, young children learned how to
      use positive self-talk (“I can do this”; “I can use my social skills”) in stressful situations.
      Finally, “Solve” consisted of the child devising a strategy to carry out the solution, eval-
      uating the solution, and using self-praise.                    
                                                                     
      Relaxation Techniques                                          
                                                                     
      Participants spent 10 minutes at the end of each session practicing a range of imagery
      and deep-muscle exercises.

=== Page 147 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 133
                                                                     
            Weeklyhomeworkassignmentsweregiven,withtheassignmentsfocusingonapartic-
          ularskillbutgraduallyincreasingindifficultyasthechildmasteredtheskill.Forexample,
                                                                     
          the children during the early portions of treatment would practice basic social skills such
          as making eye contact, and progress up to and through inviting a peer to come over and
          play at their house. Booster sessions were also conducted at 3- and 6-month posttreat-
          ment to maintain and reinforce previously acquired material. The results found that in
          comparison to a wait-list control group, significant improvement in SP symptoms were
          noted in children who were given the integrated CBT package, and treatment gains
          were maintained at the 12-month follow-up.                 
                                                                     
            Melfsin et al. (2011) conducted one of the few randomized, controlled studies demon-
          strating the efficacy of CBT among a sample of young German children diagnosed with
          SP. The treatment protocol consisted of twenty 50-minute individual sessions, as well as
          fourparentsessions.Contentincludedpsychoeducation,cognitiverestructuringthrough
          picture stories and games, testing of safety and avoidance behaviors through role-plays
          and videotaping (with feedback), and (for parents) information on social anxiety and
                                                                     
          waystohelpthemdealwiththeirchild’sfears.Resultsfoundthatatposttest,significantly
          more children were free of SP than children placed in the wait-list group at posttest.
            School phobia (or refusal) is considered a special case of social phobia (Morris &
          Ale, 2011). The disorder is characterized as a cluster of symptoms including chronic
          absenteeism, initially going to school but leaving during the day, and concomitant psy-
          chological distress and somatic complaints related to being in the school environment
                                                                     
          (Kearney&Bensaheb,2006).StudiestoinvestigatetheefficacyofCBTonschoolrefusal
          among children have been few, although what has been published has yielded positive
          results. For example, Last, Hansen, and Franco (1998) applied in vivo exposure and
          coping self-statement training for a group of children and adolescents who were referred
          for school phobia. During the first session, the children constructed a hierarchy consist-
          ing of 10 school-related items that the children feared or avoided. During the second
          session and all sessions thereafter, the children were taught to identify their maladap-
                                                                     
          tivethoughtsandanticipateand/orconfrontananxiety-producingsituation.Homework
          assignments were also given, which consisted of having the children practice a particular
          item on the hierarchy throughout the week until the next session. These assignments
          increased in difficulty as the treatment progressed. As the amount of in vivo expo-
          sure increased, the child (and parent) reevaluated the hierarchy. Coping self-statements
          were also practiced during the child’s weekly homework assignment, which served to
                                                                     
          reduce anxiety. The results found some support for the use of this form of psychother-
          apy for children, as short-term and long-term (i.e., 4-week follow-up) improvements
          were noted across both subjective (i.e., perceptions of improvement) and objective (i.e.,
          school attendance) indicators. Nevertheless, there were no marked differences between

=== Page 148 (1 cols) ===
134   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      children in the CBT group versus children who were placed in a psychoeducational
      group (i.e., children were educated about their condition but no strategies were pro-
      vided to help them confront the feared situations), suggesting that nonspecific effects
      (e.g., quality of child-therapist relationship) were involved. More recent studies that
      have combined both approaches—treatments that incorporate psychoeducation strate-
      gies, relaxation training, cognitive restructuring, and gradual exposure into a manualized
      treatment package—yield significant improvements in school phobic behaviors in com-
      parison to wait-list controls (see King & Bernstein, 2001).    
      Trauma                                                         
      Posttraumatic stress disorder is commonly associated with other disorders including
      depression, anxiety, and anger, thus treatments usually include interventions that can
      address these related symptoms as well. In recent years, there have been significant gains
      in the treatment of children who have been exposed to traumatic events primarily by
      adapting adult treatments for children and youth. Trauma treatments typically involve
      the nonoffending caregivers and other family members, if at all possible, to avoid the
      implication that the child is at fault and to ensure positive changes for the family.
        Cognitive-behavioral therapy interventions are the most commonly researched and
      supported treatment models for childhood trauma (see Chard, Gilman, Holleb, &
      Teeters, 2012). Cognitive-behavioral therapy treatments for children typically include
      one or more of the following: (a) exposure to the traumatic material, (b) cognitive
      reprocessing and reframing, (c) stress management, and (d) parent treatment. Exposure
      techniques for children can vary from talking about the traumatic event, drawing
      pictures about the trauma, writing about the trauma events, or recounting the events
      into a tape recorder. Although exposure to the traumatic memory is the therapeutic
      norm, therapists should note that not all children need to process the trauma and
      instead may find that going over the trauma is either boring or so anxiety producing
      that it is counter to therapeutic gain. Cognitive-behavioral therapy techniques usually
      adopt those used in Cognitive Processing Therapy (Resick & Schnicke, 1992). The
      most commonly used stress-reduction interventions involve diaphragmatic breathing,
      muscle relaxation, and in some cases “thought stopping,” where the child is given a
      replacement thought to say every time a distressing thought occurs.
        A growing body of research studies supports the use of CBT interventions with
      preschool children ranging from the ages of 2 to 18 (Smith et al., 2007). For example,
      in a recent randomized clinical trial, Scheeringa, Weems, Cohen, Amaya-Jackson,
                                                                     
      and Guthrie (2011) examined the effectiveness of trauma-focused CBT (TF-CBT)
      among 42 children between the ages of 3 and 6 who experienced a life-threatening
      traumatic event and were formally diagnosed with PTSD. As a treatment, TF-CBT is a
      highly structured, manualized protocol that includes (a) psychoeducation about PTSD,

=== Page 149 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 135
                                                                     
          (b) recognition of feelings, (c) trainings in coping skills, (d) graduated exposures to
          trauma-related reminders using age-appropriate materials (e.g., drawings) as well as
                                                                     
          using guided imagery and in vivo exposure, and (e) safety planning. Developmental
          modifications were made given the young age of the children, and parents either were
          in the same room as their child during treatment or observed the session in real-time
          (via television) to learn the material. Results found that in comparison to those placed
          on a wait-list control, children in the TF-CBT group exhibited significantly fewer
          PTSD symptoms over the 12 sessions of the intervention. The effect size of these
          group differences was in the large range. Similar findings have also been reported with
                                                                     
          respect to manualized cognitive therapies as applied in group format across multiple
          environments, including schools (e.g., Ngo et al., 2008; Stein et al., 2003).
                                                                     
                                                                     
          APPLICATIONS WITH ADOLESCENTS                              
          Many of the CBT interventions described earlier have also been used for adolescents
                                                                     
          experiencing the same conditions. In some respects, application of CBT to adolescents
          may be relatively easier than to young children, given the former groups’ developed
          abstract thinking abilities, social problem solving, and level of insight that would allow
          for a deeper exploration of cognitive distortions, dysfunctional attitudes and beliefs,
          and maladaptive behaviors. Nevertheless, developmental characteristics that are unique
          among this age group need to be considered by the therapist. For example, the late ado-
          lescent period signifies the final stages of preparation for life beyond graduation and,
                                                                     
          for most adolescents, the last ties to dependence on their parents. This awareness can
          lead to the adolescent beginning to examine their identity and place in the world and
          questions regarding their future become more salient and less ambiguous. Related to
          these self-appraisals is the adolescent’s view of self in relation with others. Appraisals of
          perceivedcompetenceinhandlinglifechallengesarebasedonacomplexsystemofinter-
          actions of parents, peers, romantic partners, teachers, and others at a level that is not
          usually observed among young children. This reciprocal interaction between internal
                                                                     
          thoughts and external comparisons can create a litany of potential cognitive distortions,
          many of which can interfere with daily functioning. Clinicians should be aware of these
          multiple sources when applying CBT to adolescents.         
            Other points to consider are due to the disorders themselves, or to factors that would
          interferewiththetreatmentprocess.Forexample,Kennard,Ginsburg,andFeeny(2005)
          discussed specific challenges faced by CBT therapists as they investigated the effective-
                                                                     
          ness of a treatment for adolescents diagnosed with major depressive disorder. These chal-
          lenges included (a) the high comorbidity of depression with other disorders, which could
          attenuate the effectiveness of the treatment; (b) the severity of some of the depressive
          symptomatology (e.g., sense of hopelessness); (c) the severity of self-harm and suicide

=== Page 150 (1 cols) ===
136   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      ideation; (d) interpersonal factors; and (e) treatment noncompliance. Perhaps with the
      exception of suicide ideation or self-harm, most of the challenges could be generalized
      to any adolescent disorder.                                    
      Depression and Anxiety                                         
      Cognitive-behavioral treatments for adolescent depression and anxiety often mimic
      techniques that have been found useful with adults, although modified to some extent.
      Reviews by Webb, Auerbach, and DeRubeis (2012), and Reinecke and Jacobs (2010)
      provide an overview of specific components of CBT with adolescent depression and
      anxiety, respectively. For depression, essential components include psychoeducation
      (i.e., teaching the adolescents and their family about the disorder, including how
      depression is conceptualized from the standpoint of CBT), replacing self-defeating
      thoughts with more constructive and positive thinking, increasing participation in
      pleasant activities, teaching adaptive and constructive social and communication skills,
      teaching conflict resolution skills, and teaching self-monitoring and goal-setting skills.
      For anxiety, essential components include psychoeducation (teaching the child and
      family how and why excessive levels of anxiety are leaned and maintained, and the
      rationale for various treatment techniques), somatic management techniques (e.g., deep
      breathing, relaxation training), cognitive restructuring (e.g., identifying unhelpful,
      anxiety-provoking thoughts, challenging these thoughts, and replacing them with more
      proactive and adaptive thinking), problem solving (e.g., asking the adolescent to test
      a variety of methods for coping with anxiety-inducing situations), and exposure (e.g.,
      systematic and gradual exposure).                              
        ImplementingCBTtreatmentsviaelectronicmeansisanemergentareainadolescent
      depression research. Although in its nascent stage, there is enough research to indi-
      cate that computerized CBT can effectively reduce depression/anxiety symptoms (see
      Richardson, Stallard, & Velleman, 2010, for a recent review). For example, Stallard,
      Richardson, Velleman, & Attwood (2011) conducted a randomized controlled trial con-
      sisting of 20 adolescents (ages 11 to 16) presenting with a primary problem of anxiety or
      mild/moderate depression. Adolescents placed in the immediate treatment group were
      administered a six-session “think, feeling, do” protocol, which itself was based on the
      Think Good—Feel Good workbook designed for younger youth (Stallard, 2004). Each
      program was 45 minutes in length and covered topics such as psychoeducation, emo-
      tion recognition/management, thinking positively, and problem-solving. The protocol
      is interactive, with multimedia (e.g., sounds, photos, music, and video clips) to guide the
                                                                     
      userthroughthesessions.Responsesaresavedsothatpreviousworkcanbereviewed,and
      homework assignments are given at the end of each session. Results found that in com-
      parison to the control group, significant posttreatment reductions in anxiety/depression
      symptoms were reported by adolescents in the treatment group. In addition, adolescents

=== Page 151 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 137
                                                                     
          receiving the intervention reported high levels of satisfaction with the computerized
          protocol, and that the protocol helped them understand their problems and to find new
                                                                     
          ways to cope with them.                                    
          Aggression                                                 
                                                                     
          Aggression and its many related constructs (e.g., anger, hostility, impulsivity) are viewed
          as a core symptom of various disruptive disorders, including oppositional defiant dis-
          order and conduct disorder, making it one of the most substantial social problems in
                                                                     
          today’s society. Various studies have investigated environmental and biological factors
          that contribute to aggression (see Card, Stucky, Sawalani, & Little, 2008; Rappaport
          & Thomas, 2004; Vaughn & Santos, 2007, for reviews). In addition, studies investi-
          gating aggression over the past three decades have found that cognitions play a key
          role in determining whether (and when) aggression occurs (Arsenio, Adams, & Gold,
          2009). The social-cognitive information approach has become one of the main models
          to explain aggression in children and adolescents. Various reviews have synthesized the
                                                                     
          literature regarding various social-cognitive information models and aggression in youth
          (e.g., Dodge, 1980; Dodge & Crick, 1990; Huesmann, Dubow, & Boxer, 2011; Lochman,
          Powell, Whidby, & FitzGerald, 2012; Pakaslahti, 2000), the essence of which is briefly
          reviewed below.                                            
            In general, youth regulate and monitor their behavior in social situations based on a
          series of sequential steps. Youth are first oriented toward a potentially problematic social
          situation based on their past experiences, and they attend to situational (and internal)
                                                                     
          cues based on these experiences. For aggressive youth, more attention is paid to aggres-
          sive cues and less attention is given to gathering additional facts related to the situation
          than less aggressive youth. Causality is then inferred based on these cues (e.g., why
          the event occurred and what the intent of the other youth was). For aggressive youth,
          inferences are often made that the intent of the other youth was hostile and was made
          with harm in mind. Given this interpretation, the youth then formulates a behavioral
          goal for the situation. Aggressive youth often choose hostile, revenge-seeking goals and
                                                                     
          less often choose peer affiliative goals (i.e., goals that facilitate mutual cooperation and
          peacekeeping). The youth then cognitively selects a strategy (based on similar strategies
          that worked in the past) that would most likely solve the social problem. In compar-
          ison to nonaggressive youth, aggressive youth often choose strategies that are limited
          in scope (i.e., few compromise or peer-affiliation strategies) and, given their previous
          success using similar strategies, that involve aggressive or impulsive themes. Before ulti-
                                                                     
          mately selecting a strategy, the proposed response is compared with the youths’ internal
          standards (including an appraisal of their values and normative beliefs) and against any
          potential consequences of using that response. When making these comparisons, aggres-
          sive youth evaluate aggressive strategies more favorably than their nonaggressive peers,

=== Page 152 (1 cols) ===
138   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      tend to perceive aggressive strategies as more likely to yield the desired outcome, and
      do not anticipate any consequences for their strategy. Finally, when all steps are consid-
      ered, the youth enacts the most valenced strategy. In addition to their descriptive value,
      one of the advantages of social-cognitive processing models is their explanation of why
      aggression is maintained. For aggressive youth, an ongoing feedback loop is established,
      where a predisposed tendency to attend to aggressive social cues (i.e., without consider-
      ing all information) leads to a subjective and hostile interpretation of the event based
      on these misinterpreted cues, ultimately leading to the youth selecting behavior that is
      most consistent with the interpretation.                       
        The goal of CBT is thus to have the youth reexamine their original selection of envi-
      ronmental or internal cues, to seek more facts about the situation before formulating
      and selecting a behavior, to select less hostile and more adaptive problem-solving solu-
      tions, and to anticipate the consequences of their actions. Interventions usually involve
      role-playing, practicing of social skills and cognitive reinterpretation in session, home-
      work assignments, and involvement of parents.                  
        Although studies to investigate the efficacy of CBT in reducing aggression have been
      limited, published papers have revealed that both clinic- and school-based interven-
      tions can reduce aggression over the long term. As one early example, Guerra and Slaby
      (1990) applied a form of CBT to 120 male and female adolescents incarcerated for
      aggression offenses. The youth were randomly assigned and placed into a CBT group,
      an attention-control (where only basic skills were taught) group, and a no-treatment
      group. All groups met over a 12-week period for 1 hour per week in a group format.
      Skills that were taught and practiced in the CBT group included having all youth (a)
      attend and react to nonhostile (rather than hostile) cues when reacting to a social prob-
      lem and formulating goals, (b) seek additional information when interpreting a social
      problem, (c) generate a variety of responses and strategies based on this new interpreta-
      tion, and (d) prioritize legal, goal-directed, and nonviolent outcomes for each strategy.
      Youth were also challenged to review their beliefs that aggression was an appropriate,
      legitimate, and effective strategy by assessing what has happened to themselves and oth-
      ers by using this strategy. Finally, self-control strategies were provided to youth in the
      CBT group. All sessions followed an eight-step sequential problem-solving model that
      consisted of having the youth ascertain the following items in response to a potential
      social problem situation:                                      
         1. Is there actually a problem?                             
         2. Stop and think.                                          
                                                                     
         3. Why is there a conflict?                                 
         4. What do I want?                                          
         5. Think of solutions.

=== Page 153 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 139
                                                                     
            6. Look at consequences.                                 
            7. Choose what to do and do it.                          
                                                                     
            8. Evaluate the results.                                 
                                                                     
            The results found that in comparison to the attention-control and no-treatment
          group, youth in the CBT group self-reported and were reported by their supervisors as
          having greater social problem-solving skills, reducing their endorsement of aggression
          strategies as viable and appropriate, and reducing their aggressive and impulsive
          behaviors.                                                 
            More recent therapies continue to adapt Kendall’s (1993) cognitive-behavioral pro-
          cedures for youth (modeling, building adaptive cognitive coping skills, using rewards
                                                                     
          to modify behavior, researching appropriate behavior, affective education, and training
          tasks), with the focus on reducing aggressive incidents. Results of several meta-analyses
          (e.g., Ozabaci, 2011; Sukhodolsky, Kassinove, & Gorman, 2004) find that programs that
          utilizethesetechniquescaneffectivelyreduceadolescentaggression,withreportedeffect
          sizes typically in the medium range.                       
                                                                     
                                                                     
          FAMILY INTERVENTIONS                                       
                                                                     
          On an individual basis, CBT appears to be efficacious in alleviating many child and
          adolescent disorders. Nevertheless, inclusion of the family is important considering that
          (a) many of the characteristics of a disorder in the child are also manifested in the family
                                                                     
          and (b) the etiology of many disorders may be due, in no small part, to parent or family
          factors such as poor modeling and communication styles, family hostility, an overcon-
          trolling and authoritarian parenting style, and high enmeshment (Asarnow, Scott, &
          Mintz, 2002; Ginsburg & Schlossburg, 2002; McLaughlin et al., 2012). Indeed, the child
          or adolescent who is referred for therapy is often viewed as a “symptom” of discord in the
          family system. Although the inclusion of families in empirically-based CBT studies have
                                                                     
          only recently begun, there is evidence to suggest that family-focused CBT yields addi-
          tional treatment gains above what is found using individual-oriented CBT (e.g., Wood,
          McLeod, Piacentini, & Sigman, 2009).                       
            Including family members is also necessary for other reasons. For example, family
          members can assist the therapist in (a) ensuring that the children practice their weekly
          homework assignments, (b) helping the children catch their maladaptive cognitions
          as they occur, and (c) supporting the children as they face various stressful situations.
                                                                     
          Thienemann, Moore, and Tompkins (2006) found that training parents to serve as “lay
          therapists” (i.e., where specific skills were taught to help the parents work with their
          child) without working with the referred youth resulted in lower scores on parent-
          and clinician-reported measures of anxiety. However, clinicians who are considering

=== Page 154 (1 cols) ===
140   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      adapting CBT to the larger family unit should consider a number of factors that may
      limit treatment effectiveness. These factors include the severity of psychopathology in
      family members, the willingness of parents and other family members to enter therapy
      along with the referred youth (and vice versa), and the amount and type of resources
      that the family can provide.                                   
        Family-focused CBT techniques to treat anxiety and depression are adapted from
      those that are used in individual therapy. Such techniques include psychoeducation
      (i.e., teaching the family about the disorder and how communication and parenting
      styles may be contributing factors) and cognitive restructuring (i.e., exploring parents’
      distorted thinking about their child in a systematic fashion). Other techniques include
      facilitating effective communication between family members and the client (e.g., how
      conflicts occur and are resolved), providing contingency management skills (i.e., having
      the parents learn and apply effective behavioral modification techniques), and, if appli-
      cable, working with parents to explore their own struggles with the referred problem and
      how their struggles may be unwittingly modeled to the child (Ginsburg & Schlossberg,
      2002). Wood et al. (2009) described specific components of their Building Confidence
      program, which was a manualized treatment that specifically targeted parents in the
      treatment of child anxiety. In addition to individual therapy with the child, parents
      were taught new communication techniques, including (a) giving choices when their
      child was indecisive (rather than making decisions for them), (b) allowing their child to
      struggle and learn through experience (rather than taking over for them), and (c) help-
      ing their child acquire novel self-help skills. In addition, a behavioral rewards system was
      alsotaughttoparents,aswellasplannedignoring(i.e.,howtoavoidattendingtoanxiety
      symptoms).                                                     
        Parent interventions for traumatized children also parallel what is conducted in indi-
      vidualsessions(J.A.Cohen,Mannarino,Berliner,&Deblinger,2000).Parentsareoften
      asked to go through an exposure phase where they discuss their thoughts and feelings
      about the child’straumatic eventand perhaps recountthe detailsaboutfinding outabout
      the trauma and dealing with the aftermath of the trauma. In the cognitive reprocessing
      phase, the therapist uses cognitive restructuring techniques to address the parents’ dis-
      torted cognitions (usually around the areas of self-blame or in some cases blaming of
      the child). Finally, stress management is taught to the parent both for their own use
      and to model healthy reactions to both the traumatized child and other children in
      the household. Parents are also taught behavioral management strategies, where the
      traumatized child is not singled out as being “damaged” and needing extra leniency,
      or where the trauma was due to the child and therefore should be punished. Instead,
      parents are taught normal child developmental stages and are encouraged to treat the
      child with sympathy but also with an expectation that the child will behave in an
      age-appropriate manner.

=== Page 155 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 141
                                                                     
          CONSIDERING  CBT GROUP INTERVENTIONS                       
                                                                     
          There are many advantages to using CBT in a group setting, including (a) the ability to
          mimic real-world interactions with other people, (b) the possibility of practicing newly
          learned behaviors in session under the guidance of a therapist prior to trying them in the
                                                                     
          nontherapyworld,(c)thepotentialforrole-playswherethetherapistcanbetheobserver
          instead of a participant, and (d) the ability for clients to test the hypothesis surrounding
          their beliefs using feedback from other group member’s experiences. The disadvantages
          of CBT in a group setting are similar to those found in any group treatment modality. For
          example, clients in group therapy may feel that they do not receive enough one-on-one
          individualized care and that they cannot probe deep enough into their own belief struc-
                                                                     
          ture for fear of monopolizing the group. In addition, group dynamics can sometimes
          get in the way of the clients’ ability or willingness to share their true thoughts, which
          they do more of in individual therapy. This may be especially the case among youth,
          where impression management and social desirability may be more pronounced than
          adults (considering that many of them are referred by teachers and parents, rather than
          self-referred). Further, group therapy may be limited and contraindicated for some dis-
                                                                     
          orders, including homogenous grouping of youth with conduct disorders. Strategies to
          reduce these disadvantages include explaining the purpose and role of group therapy to
          all clients before the group starts, conducting thorough screening of group members, ask-
          ing the clients to create group rules that will make the group safe and productive for all
          group members, and offering individual therapy in conjunction with the group for those
          that require it.                                           
                                                                     
            In group therapy, as in individual therapy, the CBT therapist first conducts a check-in
          and asks to see if anyone has a pressing concern. The therapist, with the assistance of
          the group members, then creates an agenda (which may be partially predetermined if
          following a manual) and discusses the prior session’s homework assignment. Introduc-
          tion of a new topic of discussion follows, with the therapist teaching new information
          to the group. Finally, the therapist assigns homework for the next session and checks to
                                                                     
          make sure that any unresolved issues prior to the session have been addressed (White,
          2000). Group treatments are typically conducted in a school setting by a school coun-
          selor or school psychologist or in a clinical setting by a mental health practitioner.
          Cognitive-behavioral therapy group models for children and adolescents have been cre-
          ated for the treatment of depression, anxiety (including panic and specific phobias),
          PTSD, bereavement, social skills training, eating disorders, attention deficit disorder,
                                                                     
          and parent training.                                       
            For example, Manassis et al. (2002) conducted a randomized study of CBT compar-
          ing 12 sessions of group and individual therapy with 78 8- to 12-year-olds suffering
          from childhood anxiety. The child received either group or individual therapy using

=== Page 156 (1 cols) ===
142   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      the Coping Bear Workbook (an adaptation of Kendall’s (1990) Coping Cat Workbook).
      The focus of these sessions was on helping the child identify their physical reactions to
      anxiety, as well as teaching them how to relax, change their unhealthy self-talk, and to
      reinforce healthy coping skills. Both treatments contained a parental component with
      the parent either attending part of the individual sessions with the child or attending
      group therapy based on the book Keys in Parenting Your Anxious Child (Manassis, 1996).
      These groups approximately paralleled the work being done in the individual sessions
      with a focus on helping parents understand and deal with their child’s anxiety and how
      to help their child cope with anxiety-provoking situations. The authors found that both
      parents and children reported a significant decrease in anxiety regardless of whether they
      received group or individual therapy, although children with high levels of social anxiety
      appeared to do better when they received individual therapy versus group therapy.
      EFFICACY                                                       
      Successful treatment of psychological disorders using CBT methods remains promising,
      with more than 325 published outcome studies using CBT interventions, although more
      work remains in this area (Butler, Chapman, Forman, & Beck, 2006). There is still some
      debate regarding the differential effectiveness of CBT over other forms of treatment,
      the type of control groups used to determine its effectiveness, and the long-term out-
      come of the reported changes. Recent meta-analyses have attempted to address these
      limitations (e.g., Michael & Crowley, 2002; Weisz, McCarty, & Valeri, 2006), and all
      indicate to a relative extent that CBT yields benefits above the use of medications and
      control groups. Nevertheless, there is disagreement about the strength of this bene-
      fit (as determined by the magnitude of effect sizes), and the ability of CBT to main-
      tain at a long-term follow-up. Butler et al. (2006) examined existing meta-analytic
      studies and other high-quality research articles across 16 psychological disorders. Their
      findings suggest the CBT is “highly effective” for adolescent unipolar depression and
      childhood depressive and anxiety disorders. Cognitive-behavioral therapy was associ-
                                                                     
      ated with high effect sizes for bulimia and more moderate effect sizes for childhood
      somatic disorders. The authors also examined CBT’s strength over time and found that
      CBT does seem to have long-term effectiveness for childhood internalizing disorders.
      Based on their findings, the authors made several recommendations including the need
      to (a) apply CBT to a wider range of psychological disorders, (b) examine the long-term
      efficacy of CBT, and (c) compare CBT to alternative active treatments, not just to
                                                                     
      control groups.                                                
        Even in Butler et al.’s (2006) review, the authors acknowledge that some of their
      findings must be considered preliminary as the number of studies considered in parts
      of the meta-analyses is quite small. The dearth of studies can in part be related to the

=== Page 157 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 143
                                                                     
          relative youth of child treatments and difficulties in performing child and adolescent
          research. For example, it has only been relatively recently that childhood depression
                                                                     
          was a phenomenon that was outside the realm of normal development and was thus
          recognized as a legitimate field of study (Kovacs, 1989). Compounding this problem
          are numerous limitations in published child and adolescent treatment studies, including
          the lack of an adequate control group, use of different samples in one study (e.g., clinic-
          versus community-based samples), combining younger children with older youth, the
          inability to tease out the effects of medications from CBT gains, and differential diagno-
          sis of disorders using various selection criteria and measurement instruments (Kendall
                                                                     
          & Choudhury, 2003). Given these limitations, it can be cautiously assumed that CBT
          works for some child and adolescent disorders, but additional research is necessary before
          definite conclusions can be drawn across the spectrum.     
                                                                     
                                                                     
          CASE STUDY                                                 
                                                                     
          “Julie,” age 14, was referred for CBT for behavioral, social, and academic difficulties
          stemming from abuse by her father at age 12. Her father was incarcerated for the abuse
          andJulie’smotherhadsolecustody.Thepresentingproblemsincludedadramaticchange
          in personality from outgoing and bubbly to introverted and sullen, difficulties concen-
          trating at school and a decreasing GPA, a diminished social circle, and anger outbursts
          and general noncompliance both at home and at school. An initial evaluation over
          the telephone with the mother suggested that Julie may benefit from therapy if she was
                                                                     
          willing to participate.                                    
          Assessment                                                 
                                                                     
          An orientation and assessment session was scheduled with Julie and her mother that
          consisted of a structured interview with the mother and Julie together, separate inter-
          views with Julie and her mother, and a standardized assessment battery that assessed
          the presence of mood disorders (including anxiety, depression, PTSD) with corroborat-
                                                                     
          ing measures given to the mother. Results from these assessments yielded a number of
          conclusions. First, Julie met criteria for two mood disorders: PTSD and major depres-
          sion, based on the most recent criteria specified in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
          of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Second,
          Julie felt that her mother blamed her for the break-up of the family and for not pre-
          venting the abuse, but she felt that she could not share these thoughts with her mother.
                                                                     
          Unbeknown to Julie, her mother had adopted a permissive parenting orientation with
          Julie, based on feelings of guilt that she “should have known something was happening”
          and because she felt that Julie was too vulnerable to handle “normal rules.” Third, Julie
          acknowledged that she was having a tough time at school. She could not specify reasons

=== Page 158 (1 cols) ===
144   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      for her difficulty, other than to report that she could not concentrate and school no
      longer seemed to matter to her. Julie also stated that she was more irritable than before,
      whichshe attributed to the “stupid things” thatpeopledidaroundherthat upsether. She
      reported that she wished that everyone would just leave her alone. Finally, Julie’s mother
      noted that Julie had significantly changed her appearance since the abuse, and she now
      had several ear piercings and a nose piercing, wore baggy clothes, and had a short, spiked
      hair style that was sometimes painted blue. Julie shrugged her shoulders in response to
      her mother’s statements about her dress, stating that “it was time for a change.” The
      therapist conceptualized the problem to Julie and her mother and presented some treat-
      ment options, including cognitive processing therapy for sexual abuse (CPT-SA; Chard,
      2005), a cognitive-behavioral treatment for PTSD and related symptoms. Julie decided
      that CPT-SA was something she would like to try, but she was concerned that her
      mother would not respect her privacy as she went through the treatment. She stated
      that she wanted some assurances from her mother that she would not attempt to be
      overly involved in the treatment, and her mother complied with this request.
      Treatment Program                                              
      Cognitive processing therapy is offered in 12 to 17 sessions, depending on the type of
      trauma and the amount of distress that the individual is experiencing. The adapted ver-
      sion, CPT-SA, was designed specifically for childhood sexual abuse survivors and Julie
      and her mother opted for that option. Cognitive processing therapy for sexual abuse
      is multifaceted and sequentially ordered, with subsequent sessions building on skills
      learned in previous sessions. One important section of CPT-SA focuses on having the
      client understand developmental issues, and how childhood sexual abuse plays a role in
      shaping self-identity, attachment, self-concept, and self-esteem. The client’s patterns of
      thinking and behaving that were established before, during, and after the abuse are dis-
      cussed in detail. In addition, the client discusses with the therapist their developmental
      interruptions and experiences, helping them to understand the ways in which the three
      schematic levels most affected by sexual abuse (i.e., intraindividual, interpersonal, and
      worldview) are formed and reinforced through their interactions with others. Emphasis
      is placed on how cognitions and affect are tightly linked. Further, sexual abuse survivors
      often have less opportunity to develop extensive positive coping skills, because their
      thought processes are continually being mediated by their high levels of negative affect
      (e.g., sadness, fear, anger). This in turn can affect attachments both with family and
      peers. Thus, particularly in the first few weeks of therapy, sessions focus on labeling the
                                                                     
      full range of emotions for clients who often have a limited range of affect.
        As the cognitions and emotions are addressed and adequately labeled by the
      client, subsequent CPT-SA sessions focus on seven belief areas including safety, trust,
      power/control, esteem, assertiveness/communication, intimacy, and social support.

=== Page 159 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 145
                                                                     
          Sexual abuse survivors commonly report ineffective or negative cognitions related to
          these seven themes. In each of these seven areas, CPT-SA helps clients refrain from
                                                                     
          distorting events to fit preexisting beliefs (i.e., assimilation) and encourages them to
          change their existing schemas to incorporate new information (i.e., accommodation).
          The intervention addresses schemas that have either been altered or confirmed by
          the abuse and identifies contextual factors that shaped these beliefs during the period
          of victimization. Although these negative cognitions may have served as adaptive
          coping mechanisms during the abuse, CPT-SA helps the individual identify disruptive
          schemas and incorporate more adaptive schemas that are more appropriate to current
                                                                     
          life situations.                                           
            In Sessions 1 to 3, Julie was educated about CPT-SA, her symptom disturbance, and
          characteristics that typify normal and abnormal development. During the initial ses-
          sions, the therapist also talked to Julie and her mother about PTSD, common reactions
          to PTSD, and ways in which Julie’s mother could be of support during the treatment.
          The concept of “stuck points” or “rules” that Julie was using also were introduced to
                                                                     
          identify some distorted cognitions. A heavy emphasis was placed on understanding her
          family environment and the schema that developed from both the abuse and the family
          dynamics. Julie was asked to write an Impact of Event statement that described the ways
          in which she felt she had been affected by the trauma. Problem-solving sheets were used
          to help Julie identify ways in which events are tied to thoughts and feelings.
            InSessions4to7,Juliewasaskedtoprocesstheabusethroughawrittenrecapitulation
          of the traumatic event(s). She read her written accounts most days at home and dur-
                                                                     
          ing each session to the therapist. Julie also continued to use the problem-solving sheets
          to process her thoughts and feelings about the abuse, and about everyday life events.
          In Sessions 8 to 10, Julie was encouraged to modify her cognitive distortions by using
          the Challenging Questions Sheet (CQS) and the Disruptive Thinking Patterns (DTP)
          sheet. These sheets allowed Julie and the therapist to examine evidence for and against
          her perceptions and to examine their basis. Finally, in Sessions 11 to 17, Julie learned
          to use the Challenging Beliefs Worksheet (CBW) to challenge her beliefs related to
                                                                     
          safety, trust, power/control, self-esteem, communication, intimacy, and social support.
          The CBW was a comprehensive worksheet that combines all of the sheets Julie had pre-
          viously completed in therapy (e.g., the problem-identification sheet, the CQS, and the
          DTP). Additional questions focused on having her generate alternative thoughts and
          decatastrophizing possible future events.                  
            At the concluding week, Julie was asked to rewrite her Impact of Event Statement,
                                                                     
          which she compared against her statement that was completed in the first session. Julie
          expressed that she wassurprised to see hownegativeshe was inthe first session, including
          how angry she was at the world, and how certain she was that everyone knew she was an
          abuse survivor and they were judging her because of it. In the rewritten statement, Julie

=== Page 160 (1 cols) ===
146   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      noted that she was more in control of her thoughts and feelings and she was reacting to
      others typically after stepping back and evaluating the situation instead of mind reading
      and jumping to conclusions, which she had been doing.          
        Throughout the sessions, the therapist maintained a collaborative relationship by
      allowing Julie to decide which traumatic event she would write about first and by having
      Julie decide which thoughts needed to be challenged and which thoughts were part of
      her normal developmental process.                              
      Parent Involvement                                             
      Stimulated by her discussion with the therapist, Julie allowed her mother to visit with
      her and the therapist during the last minutes of some sessions to talk to the therapist
      about Julie’s progress and to discuss any concerns that the mother might have. At the
      end of Session 4, before Julie began recapitulating the traumatic event(s), the therapist
      explained to Julie and her mother that writing about the trauma can be very distress-
      ing and processed both Julie’s and her mother’s thoughts and feelings about completing
      this assignment. Julie’s mother was encouraged to be supportive of Julie’s need for pri-
      vacy during this period and that she should be aware of Julie’s potential for increased
      moodiness over the next 3 weeks.                               
        Later sessions focused on communication between Julie and her mother. For example,
      in Session 11 Julie indicated that her mother “let her get away with anything” and she
      perceived this as an indication that her mother did not care what happened to her and
      saw her as a burden. The therapist led Julie through a CBW focused on Julie’s belief that
      her mother does not care about her. Julie was able to identify an underlying belief that
      she believes she is to blame for the abuse and the break-up of the family and that she
      is assuming her mother feels the same way. This cognition was in turn challenged using
      the CBW and Julie agreed that she might want to do some reality testing to examine
      the situation with her mother. To that end, the therapist and Julie role-played how Julie
      could approach her mother about her thoughts and feelings, and what her mother’s pos-
      sible responses could be. Afterward, Julie talked to her mother with the therapist present
      and Julie was shocked when her mother began crying and stated that she blamed her-
      self for Julie being hurt by her father. This interchange appeared to bring Julie and her
      mother closer and opened lines of communication regarding the trauma that had previ-
      ously been closed. The therapist also discussed parenting roles and boundaries with Julie
      and her mother. Julie’s mother acknowledged that she was not enforcing many rules at
      home and she agreed to work on setting more healthy boundaries with Julie. In Ses-
                                                                     
      sion 13, the therapist asked Julie’s mother how the boundary setting was working. Julie
      and her mother reported that they felt that having more rules and structure was actually
      helping their relationship. Finally, the therapist met with Julie and her mother at the

=== Page 161 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 147
                                                                     
          end of Session 17 to talk about what therapy had accomplished, help plan for the future,
          and discuss ways to handle future stressors that might develop (e.g., the release of Julie’s
                                                                     
          father from prison).                                       
          Evaluation                                                 
                                                                     
          At the conclusion of therapy, Julie and her mother were asked to complete all of the
          assessment measures that they filled in a pretreatment (with the exception of historical
          measures, which would not have changed over time). At treatment completion, Julie no
                                                                     
          longer met criteria for PTSD or for major depression and her anger levels were signifi-
          cantly lower than what was reported at the initial session. Julie reported having periods
          of irritability, but she also stated that they were becoming less and less frequent. These
          findings were corroborated by her mother’s assessments. Both Julie and her mother stated
          that one of the best parts of the therapy was their increased and positive communication
          between them. The mother also revealed that she was seeking therapy as well due to the
          significant positive improvements she was observing in her daughter.
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
          REFERENCES                                                 
                                                                     
          Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., & Teasdale, J. D. (1978). Learned helplessness in humans:
            Critique and reformulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87, 49–74.
          Albano, A. M., Chorpita, B. F., & Kendall, P. C. (1996). Childhood anxiety disorders. In E. J.
            Mash & R. A. Barkely (Eds.), Child psychopathology (pp. 196–241). New York, NY: Guilford
            Press.                                                   
          Alford, B. A., & Beck, A. T. (1997). The integrative power of cognitive therapy. New York, NY:
            Guilford Press.                                          
          AmericanPsychiatricAssociation.(2013).Diagnosticandstatisticalmanualofmentaldisorders(5th
            ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.    
          Arsenio, W. F., Adams, E., & Gold. J. (2009). Social information processing, moral reasoning,
            and emotion attributions: Relations with adolescents reactive and proactive aggression. Child
            Development, 80, 1739–1755.                              
                                                                     
          Asarnow, J. R., & Carlson, G. A. (1988). Childhood depression: Five-year outcome following
            combined cognitive-behavior therapy and pharmacotherapy. American Journal of Psychother-
            apy, 42, 456–464.                                        
          Asarnow, J. R., Scott, C. V., & Mintz, J. (2002). A combined cognitive-behavioral family edu-
            cation intervention for depression in children: A treatment development study. Cognitive
            Therapy and Research, 26, 221–229.                       
          Bandura, A., Blanchard, E. B., & Ritter, B. (1969). Relative efficacy of desensitization and
            modeling approaches for inducing behavioral, affective, and attitudinal changes. Journal of
            Personality and Social Psychology, 13, 173–199.

=== Page 162 (1 cols) ===
148   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Barrett, P. M., Duffy, A. L., Dadds, M. R., & Rapee, R. M. (2001). Cognitive-behavioral treat-
        ment of anxiety disorders in children: Long-term (6-year) follow-up. Journal of Consulting and
        Clinical Psychology, 69, 135–141.                            
      Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression. New York, NY: Harper & Row.    
      Beck, A. T. (2008). The evolution of the cognitive model of depression and its neurobiological
        correlates. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 969–977.    
      Beck, J. S., & Beck, A. T. (2011). Cognitive therapy: Basics and beyond (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
        Guilford Press.                                              
      Butler, A. C., Chapman, J. E., Forman, E. M., & Beck, A. T. (2006). The empirical status of
        cognitive-behavioraltherapy:Areviewofmeta-analysis.ClinicalPsychologyReview,26,17–31.
       Card,N.A.,Stucky,B.D.,Sawalani,G.M.,&Little,T.D.(2008).Directandindirectaggression
        during childhood and adolescence: A meta-analytic review of gender differences, intercorre-
        lations, and relations to maladjustment. Child Development, 79, 1185–1229.
       Chard, K. M. (2005). An evaluation of cognitive processing therapy for the treatment of post-
        traumatic stress disorder related to childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
        Psychology, 73, 965–971.                                     
       Chard, K., Gilman, R., Holleb, L., & Teeters, A. (2012). Behavior and classroom management of
        children and adolescents with PTSD. In J. Kolbert and L. Crothers (Eds.), Understanding and
        managing behaviors of children with psychiatric disorders: A reference for classroom teachers (pp.
        269–284). New York, NY: Bloomsbury Press.                    
       Chavira, D. A., Stein, M. B., Bailey, K., & Stein, M .T. (2005). Child anxiety in primary care:
        Prevalent but untreated. Depression and Anxiety, 155–164.    
       Choate-Summers, M. L., Freeman, J. B., Garcia, A. M., Coyne, L., Przeworski, A., & Leonard,
        H.L.(2008).Clinicalconsiderationswhentailoringcognitivebehavioraltreatmentforyoung
        children with obsessive compulsive disorder. Education & Treatment of Children, 31, 395–416.
       Cohen, J. A., Mannarino, A. P., Berliner, L., & Deblinger, E. (2000). Trauma-focused cognitive
        behavioral therapy for children and adolescents: An empirical update. Journal of Interpersonal
        Violence, 15, 1202–1223.                                     
       DeWit, D. J., Ogborne, A., & Offord, D. R. (1999). Antecedents of the risk of recovery from
        DSM-III-R social phobia. Psychological Medicine, 29, 569–582.
       Dobson,K.S.,&Dozois,D.J.A.(2001).Cognitive-behavioraltherapywithyouth.InK.Dobson
        (Ed.), Handbook of cognitive behavioral therapies (2nd ed., pp. 3–39). New York, NY: Guilford
        Press.                                                       
       Dodge, K. A. (1980). Social cognition and children’s aggressive behavior. Child Development, 51,
        162–170.                                                     
       Dodge, K. A., & Crick, N. R. (1990). Social information-processing bases of aggressive behavior
        in children. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 16, 8–22.
       Dollard, J., & Miller, N. E. (1951). Personality and psychotherapy: An analysis in terms of learning,
        thinking, and culture. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.            
       Dowd, E. T. (2003). Cultural differences in cognitive therapy. Behavior Therapist, 26, 247–249.
       Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. New York, NY: Stuart.

=== Page 163 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 149
                                                                     
          Field, C., & Duchoslav, R. (2009). Family influence on adolescent treatment outcomes. In T. W.
            O’Donohue & L. W. Tolle (Eds.), Behavioral approaches to chronic disease in adolescence: A guide
            to integrative care (pp. 47–54). New York, NY: Springer. 
          Ginsburg, G. S., & Schlossberg, M. C. (2002). Family-based treatment of childhood anxiety
                                                                     
            disorders. International Review of Psychiatry, 14, 143–154.
          Gordon, E. A., Johnson, K., Heimberg, R. G., Montesi, J. L., & Fauber, R. L. (2013).
            Bi-directional positive illusions in romantic relationships: Possibilities and pitfalls for the
            socially anxious. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 32, 200–224.
          Grave, J., & Blissett, J. (2004). Is cognitive behavior therapy developmentally appropriate for
            young children? A critical review of the evidence. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 399–420.
          Guerra, N. G., & Slaby, R. G. (1990). Cognitive mediators of aggression in adolescent offenders:
            II. Intervention. Developmental Psychology, 26, 269–277. 
          Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and commitment therapy: An
            experiential approach to behavior change. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
          Heath, N., Roberts, E., & Toste, J. R. (2013). Perceptions of academic performance: Positive
            illusions in adolescents with and without learning disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities,
            46, 402–412.                                             
          Heider, E. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York, NY: Wiley.
          Hirsch, C. R., & Clark, D. M. (2004). Information-processing bias in social phobia. Clinical Psy-
                                                                     
            chology Review, 24, 799–825.                             
          Hudson, J. L., &Kendall, P. C. (2002). Showing you can do it: Homework in therapy for children
            and adolescents with anxiety disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58, 525–534.
          Huesmann, L. R., Dubow, E. F., & Boxer, P. (2011). The transmission of aggressiveness
            across generations: Biological, contextual, and social learning processes. In P. R. Shaver &
            M. Mikulincer (Eds.), Human aggression and violence: Causes, manifestations, and consequences
            (pp. 123–142). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
          James, W. (1909). The meaning of truth. New York, NY: Longmans, Green.
          Kazdin, A. E., Holland, L., & Crowley, M. (1997). Family experience of barriers to treatment
            and premature termination from child therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
            65, 453–463.                                             
          Kearney, C. A., & Bensaheb, A. (2006). School absenteeism and school refusal behavior: A
            review and suggestions for school-based health professionals. Journal of School Health, 76, 3–7.
          Kelly, G. A. (1955). The psychology of personal constructs: Vol. 1. A theory of personality. Oxford,
                                                                     
            England: Norton.                                         
          Kendall, P. C. (1990). Coping cat workbook. (Available from P. C. Kendall, Department of Psy-
            chology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA.)           
          Kendall,P.C.(1993).Cognitive-behavioral therapieswithyouth:Guidingtheory,currentstatus,
            and emerging developments. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 235–247.
          Kendall, P. C. (1994). Treating anxiety disorders in children: Results of a randomized clinical
            trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 100–110.
          Kendall, P. C. (Ed.). (2011).Childand adolescent therapy: Cognitive-behavioral procedures (4th ed.).
            New York, NY: Guilford Press.

=== Page 164 (1 cols) ===
150   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Kendall, P. C., & Choudhury, M. S. (2003). Children and adolescents in cognitive-behavioral
        therapy: Some past efforts and current advances, and the challenges in our future. Cognitive
        Therapy and Research, 27, 89–104.                            
      Kennard, B. D., Ginsburg, G. S., & Feeny, N. C. (2005). Implementation challenges to TADS
        cognitive-behavioral therapy. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 12, 230–239.
      King, N. J., & Bernstein, G. A. (2001). School refusal in children and adolescents: A review
        of the past 10 years. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 40,
        197–205.                                                     
      Kovacs, M. (1989). Affective disorders in children and adolescents. American Psychologist, 44,
        209–215.                                                     
      Last, C. G., Hansen, C., & Franco, N. (1998). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of school phobia.
        Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 3, 404–411.
      Lazarus, R. S. (1966). Psychological stress and the coping process. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
      Leahy, R. L. (1996). Cognitive-behavioral therapy: Basic principles and applications. New York, NY:
        Aronson.                                                     
      Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New York,
        NY: Guilford Press.                                          
      Lochman, J. E., Powell, N. R., Whidby, J. M., & FitzGerald, D. P. (2012). Aggression in children.
        In P. C. Kendall (Ed.), Child and adolescent therapy: Cognitive-behavioral procedures (4th ed.,
        pp. 27–60). New York, NY: Guilford Press.                    
      Mahoney, M. J. (1974). Cognition and behavior modification. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
      Manassis, K. (1996). Keys to parenting your anxious child. Hauppauge, NY: Barron’s Educational
        Series.                                                      
      Manassis, K., Menlowitz, S., Scapillato, D., Avery, D., Fiksenbaum, L., Freire, M.,
                                                    …                
                                                     Owens, M.       
        (2002). Group and individual cognitive-behavioral therapy for childhood anxiety disorder:
        A randomized trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 41,
        1423–1430.                                                   
      Mancini, C., Van Ameringen, M., & Bennett, M. (2005). Emerging treatments for child and
        adolescent social phobia: A review. Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology, 15,
        589–607.                                                     
      McLaughlin, K. A., Green, J. G., Gruber, M. J., Sampson, N. A., Zaslavsky, A. M., & Kessler,
        R.C.(2012).Childhoodadversitiesandfirstonsetofpsychiatricdisordersinanationalsample
        of US adolescents. JAMA Psychiatry, 69, 1151–1160.           
      Meadows, S. (1993). The child as thinker: The development and acquisition of cognition in childhood.
        Florence, KY: Taylor & Frances/Routledge.                    
      Melfsen, S., Kühnemund, M., Schwieger, J., Warnke, A., Stadler, C., & Poustka, F. (2011). Cog-
        nitive behavioral therapy of socially phobic children focusing on cognition: A randomised
        wait-list control study. Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health, 5:5.
      Meichenbaum, D. H. (1977). Cognitive-behavior modification. New York, NY: Plenum Press.
      Michael, K. D., & Crowley, S. L. (2002). How effective are treatments for child and adolescent
        depression? A meta-analytic review. Clinical Psychology Review, 22, 247–269.

=== Page 165 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 151
                                                                     
          Miller, S. A. (2009). Children’s understanding of second-order mental states. Psychological Bul-
            letin, 135, 749–773.                                     
          Miller, V. A., & Feeny, N. C. (2003). Modification of cognitive-behavioral techniques in the
                                                                     
            treatment of a 5-year-old girl with social phobia. Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 33,
            303–319.                                                 
          Minde, K., Roy, J., Bezonsky, R., & Hashemi, A. (2010). The effectiveness of CBT in 3–7 year
            oldanxiouschildren:Preliminarydata.JournaloftheCanadianAcademyofChildandAdolescent
            Psychiatry, 19, 109–115.                                 
          Monga, S., Young, A., & Owens, M. (2009). Evaluating a cognitive behavioral therapy group
            program for anxious five to seven year old children: A pilot study. Depression and Anxiety, 26,
            243–250.                                                 
          Morris, T. L., & Ale, C. M. (2011). Social anxiety. In D. McKay & E. A. Storch (Eds.), Hand-
            book of child and adolescent anxiety disorders (pp. 289–301). New York, NY: Springer Science
                                                              +      
            Business Media.                                          
          Muris, P., & Field, A. P. (2008). Distorted cognition and pathological anxiety in children and
            adolescents. Cognition and Emotion, 22, 395–421.         
          Ngo, V., Langley, A., Kataoka, S., Nadeem, E., Escudero, P., & Stein, B. D. (2008). Providing
            evidence-basedpracticetoethnicallydiverseyouths:ExamplesfromtheCognitiveBehavioral
            Intervention for Trauma in Schools (CBITS) program. Journal of the American Academy of
            Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 47, 858–862.              
          Ozabaci, N. (2011). Cognitive behavioural therapy for violent behavior in children and adoles-
            cents: A meta-analysis. Children and Youth Services Review, 33, 1989–1993.
          Pakaslahti, L. (2000). Children’s and adolescents’ aggressive behavior in context: The develop-
            ment and application of aggressive problem-solving strategies. Aggression and Violent Behavior,
                                                                     
            5, 467–490.                                              
          Piacentini, J. (1999). Cognitive behavioral therapy of childhood OCD. Child and Adolescent Psy-
            chiatric Clinics of North America, 8, 599–616.           
          Piacentini, J., & Langley, A. K. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for children who have
            obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 60, 1181–1194.
          Rapee, R. M., & Spence, S. H. (2004). The etiology of social phobia: Empirical evidence and an
            initial model. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 737–767.  
          Rappaport, J. L., & Inoff-Germain, G. (2000). Treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder in
            children and adolescents. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 41, 419–431.
          Rappaport,J.L.,&Thomas,T.(2004).Recentresearchfindingsonaggressiveandviolentbehav-
            iorinyouth:Implicationsforclinicalassessmentandintervention.JournalofAdolescentHealth,
                                                                     
            35, 260–277.                                             
          Reinecke, M. A., & Jacobs, R. H. (2010). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for depression. In M. K.
            Dulcan(Ed.),Dulcan’stextbookofchildandadolescentpsychiatry (pp.907–914).Arlington,VA:
            American Psychiatric Publishing.                         
          Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1992). Cognitive processing therapy for sexual assault victims.
            Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 748–756.

=== Page 166 (1 cols) ===
152   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Richardson, T., Stallard, P., & Velleman, S. (2010). Computerized cognitive behavioural therapy
        for the prevention and treatment of depression and anxiety in children and adolescents: A
        systematic review. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 13, 275–290.
      Rochat, P. (1995). Perceived reachability for self and for others by 3- to 5-year-old children and
        adults. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 59, 317–333.
      Scheeringa, M. S., Weems, C. F., Cohen, J. A., Amaya-Jackson, L., & Guthrie, D. (2011).
        Trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy for posttraumatic stress disorder in three-
        through six-year-old children: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Child Psychology and Psy-
        chiatry, 52, 853–860.                                        
      Seligman, M.E.P. (1975). Helplessness: On depression, development, and death. San Francisco, CA:
        Freeman.                                                     
      Shirk, S. R. (1998). Interpersonal schemata in child psychotherapy: A cognitive-interpersonal
        perspective. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 27, 4–16. 
      Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and human behavior. Oxford, England: Macmillan.
      Smith, P., Yule, W., Perrin, S., Tranah, T., Dalgleish, T., & Clark, D. M. (2007).
        Cognitive-behavioral therapy for PTSD in children and adolescents: A preliminary random-
        ized controlled trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 46,
        1051–1061.                                                   
      Spence, S. H., Donovan, C., & Brechman-Toussaint, M. (1999). Social skills, social outcomes,
        and cognitive features of childhood social phobia. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108,
        211–221.                                                     
      Spence, S. H., Donovan, C., & Brechman-Toussaint, M. (2000). The treatment of childhood
        social phobia: The effectiveness of social skills training-based, cognitive-behavioural inter-
        vention, with or without parental involvement. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 41,
        713–726.                                                     
      Sperry, L. (1997). Adlerian psychotherapy and cognitive therapy: An Adlerian perspective. Jour-
        nal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 11, 157–164.                 
      Stallard, P. (2004). Cognitive behaviour therapy with prepubertal children. In P. Graham
        (Ed.), Cognitive behaviour therapy for children and families (2nd ed., pp. 121–135). Cambridge,
        England: Cambridge University Press.                         
      Stallard, P. (2009). Cognitive behaviour therapy with children and young people. In H. Beinart,
        P. Kennedy, & S. Llewelyn (Eds.), Clinical psychology in practice (pp. 117–126). Leicester,
        England: British Psychological Society.                      
      Stallard, P., Richardson, T., Velleman, S., & Attwood, M. (2011). Computerized CBT (think,
        feel, do) for depression and anxiety in children and adolescents: Outcomes and feedback from
        a pilot randomized controlled trial. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 39, 273–284.
      Stark, K. D., Reynolds, W. M., & Kaslow, N. J. (1987). A comparison of the relative efficacy
        of self-control therapy and a behavioral problem-solving therapy for depression in children.
        Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 15, 91–113.            
      Stein, B. D., Jaycox, L. H., Kataoka, S. H., Wong, M., Tu, W., Elliott, M., & Fink, A. (2003). A
        mental health intervention for schoolchildren exposed to violence: A randomized controlled
        trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 290(5), 603–611.

=== Page 167 (1 cols) ===
Cognitive-Behavioral and Behavioral Approaches 153
                                                                     
          Sukhodolsky, D. G., Kassinove, H., & Gorman, B. S. (2004). Cognitive-behavioral therapy
            for anger in children and adolescents: A meta-analysis. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 9,
            247–269.                                                 
          Taylor, S. E., Lerner, J. S., Sherman, D. K., Sage, R. M., & McDowell, N. K. (2003). Are self-
                                                                     
            enhancing cognitions associated with healthy or unhealthy biological profiles? Journal of Per-
            sonality and Social Psychology, 85, 605–615.             
          Thienemann, M., Moore, P., & Tompkins, K. (2006). A parent-only group intervention for chil-
            drenwithanxietydisorders:Pilotstudy.JournaloftheAmericanAcademyofChildandAdolescent
            Psychiatry, 45, 37–46.                                   
          Vaughn,B.E.,&Santos,A.J.(2007).Anevolutionary/ecologicalaccountofaggressivebehavior
            and trait aggression in human children and adolescents. In P. H. Hawley, T. D. Little, & P. C.
            Rodkin (Eds.), Aggression and adaptation: The bright side to bad behavior (pp. 31–62). Mahwah,
            NJ: Erlbaum.                                             
          Watson, J. B., & Rayner, R. (1920). Conditioned emotional reactions. Journal of Experimental
            Psychology, 3, 1–14.                                     
          Webb,C.A.,Auerbach,R.P.,&DeRubeis,R.J.(2012).ProcessesofchangeinCBTofadolescent
            depression: Review and recommendations. Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology,
            41, 654–665.                                             
                                                                     
          Weisz, J. R., McCarty, M. A., & Valeri, S. M. (2006). Effects of psychotherapy for depression in
            children and adolescents: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 132, 132–149.
          White, J. R. (2000). Introduction. In J. R. White & A. S. Freeman (Eds.), Cognitive-behavioral
            group therapy for specific problems and populations (pp. 3–28). Washington, DC: American Psy-
            chological Association.                                  
          Williams, T. I., Salkovskis, P. M., Forrester, L., Turner, S., White, H., & Allsopp, M. A. (2010).
            A randomised controlled trial of cognitive behavioural treatment for obsessive compulsive
            disorder in children and adolescents. European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 19, 449–456.
          Wolpe, J. (1958). Psychotherapy by reciprocal inhibition. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
          Wood, J. J., McLeod, B. D., Piacentini, J. C., & Sigman, M. (2009). One-year follow-up of family
            versus child CBT for anxiety disorders: Exploring the roles of child age and parental intru-
            siveness. Child Adolescent Psychiatry and Human Development, 40, 301–316.
          Wright, J. H., Basco, M. R., & Thase, M. E. (2006). Learning cognitive behavior therapy: An illus-
            trated guide. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.

=== Page 168 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 169 (1 cols) ===
CHAPTER                              
                                   6                                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Rational      Emotive      Behavior      Therapy           
                                                                     
                                                                     
                   R                                                 
                    AYMOND                                           
                          D                                          
                           I                                         
                           G                                         
                             IUSEPPE AND                             
                                     O                               
                                      ANA                            
                                         A                           
                                           LEXANDRA                  
                                                  D                  
                                                   AVID              
          A   lbert Ellis is considered the grandfather of cognitive behavior therapy because
              he developed Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy (REBT), one of the original
          forms of cognitive-behavioral therapies (CBT). Ellis, a psychologist, psychotherapist,
          and philosopher, was one of the first psychotherapists to focus therapy on actively chang-
          ingaclient’spresentbeliefsystemstoachieveemotionalorbehavioralchange.Although
          REBT was one of the first forms of CBT, it differs from CBT theories in several distinc-
          tive ways. REBT can be considered as part of the larger family of CBT interventions,
          yet maintains some distinctiveness. As a result, the literature on REBT often refers
          to REBT in two ways (Ellis, 2001, 2005a, 2005b). The term “classical REBT” refers
          to the distinctive features of REBT and the interventions and strategies that follow
          from these distinctive features. The term “general REBT” refers to the use of distinctive
          aspects of REBT plus the inclusion of other forms of CBT such as Beck’s (2005) cog-
          nitive therapy, social problem solving therapy (Nezu, Maguth Nezu, & D’Zurilla, 2013)
          and self-instructional training (Meichenbaum, 1993). Thus, most REBT incorporate the
          classical, distinctive features of REBT while using the techniques of the wider field of
          CBT (Ellis, 2001, 2004). Early in its development REBT focused on the problems of
          children, adolescents, and parents (Bernard, Ellis, & Terjesen, 2006). In this chapter,
          we focus on describing classical REBT and its distinctive features, strategies, and tech-
          niques. A list of the distinctive features of REBT, as outlined by Dryden (2009), appears
          below. The reader is advised that in practice almost all REBT practitioners integrate
          classic REBT with interventions from CBT.                  
                                   155

=== Page 170 (1 cols) ===
156   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Distinctive Features of Ellis’ Theory of Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy
         • ABC model focuses on underlying irrational beliefs and not automatic thoughts.
         • Rigidity is at the core of psychological disturbance.     
         • Flexibility is at the core of psychological health.       
         • Extreme beliefs are derived from rigid beliefs.           
         • Non-extreme beliefs are derived from flexible beliefs.    
         • The distinction between maladaptive or unhealthy negative emotions and adap-
           tive or healthy negative emotions is qualitative not quantitative.
         • Self-esteem is a dangerous, elusive concept.              
         • There is a distinction between ego and discomfort disturbance.
         • People get upset about their emotional experience. Sometimes Cs becomes As.
         • Humans are both biologically rational and irrational.     
        REBT is directive because the theory hypothesizes that certain types of cognitions
      cause or mediate disturbance and other types of cognitions promote adjustment. REBT
      recommends that psychotherapists focus on challenging the thoughts that lead to distur-
      bance rather than wait for clients to self-discover the reasons for their problems. REBT
      is psychoeducational because it maintains that people can be taught the skills of iden-
      tifying, challenging, and replacing their dysfunctional beliefs. REBT is philosophical
      because it takes specific positions on epistemology and recommends a philosophy of life.
      REBT is multimodal because it recognizes that people learn to think, feel, and act dif-
      ferently through many methods. Interventions from general CBT and many other forms
      of psychotherapy have been integrated with REBT. The system recommends the use of
      cognitive, emotive, imaginal, behavioral, and systemic techniques.
        The trademark of REBT is its emphasis on teaching people to learn their ABCs
      of emotional disturbance, identifying the activating events, their beliefs about those
      events, and the resulting consequences. REBT teaches that disturbed emotional and
      behavioral consequences result from irrational beliefs individuals hold rather than from
      activating events. REBT works to alleviate emotional disturbance by helping people to
      (a) identify their irrational beliefs, (b) recognize that the irrational beliefs are maladap-
      tive, and (c) replace those dysfunctional cognitions with more adaptive beliefs.
        Ellis’s writings include his personal philosophy, a recommended philosophy of life, a
      theory of psychopathology, and a theory of psychotherapy. While reading the REBT lit-
      erature, one can encounter all of these elements. One could agree with aspects of Ellis’s
      writings, such as his theory of psychopathology, and yet disagree with other aspects, such
                                                                     
      as his personal philosophy. For example, Ellis was an atheist. However, REBT is com-
      patible with religious beliefs (DiGiuseppe, Robin, & Dryden, 1991; Nielsen, Johnson,
      & Ellis, 2001), and research has demonstrated that secular REBT and religious versions

=== Page 171 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 157
                                                                     
          of REBT are equally effective with religious clients (Johnson, Devries, Ridley, Pettorini,
          & Peterson, 1994; Johnson & Ridley, 1992).                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
          HISTORY AND STATUS                                         
                                                                     
          Before becoming a psychologist, Ellis worked as an accountant while he pursued inter-
          ests in music, literature, philosophy, and politics. He wrote operas and other musical
          scores,authorednovels,andspenttimeasapoliticalactivist.Duringtheseyears,Elliswas
                                                                     
          interested in romantic and sexual relationships and read voraciously on the topic, partly
          to overcome his own dating anxiety. Friends frequently approached him for romantic
          advice, and on their recommendation, he enrolled in the doctoral program in clinical
          psychology at Columbia University at the age of 40.        
            After completing graduate school in the late 1940s, Ellis started psychoanalytic train-
          ing and simultaneously started to practice marital and sex therapy. Ellis became discour-
          aged with the efficiency of psychoanalysis in the early 1950s. He realized that he helped
                                                                     
          clients in his sex and marital therapy practice more than those he treated with psycho-
          analysis.Initially,Ellisthoughtthatheneededtodigdeeperintohispatients’pastsbefore
          they would improve. Yet, after they gained more insight, they still failed to improve. Ellis
          thoughtthatyearsofinsightintochildhoodexperiencesdidnotnecessarilyhelppatients
          and concluded that insight led to change in only a small percentage of individuals.
            Ellis recognized that he behaved differently with clients in his marital and sex therapy
                                                                     
          practice. He actively taught these clients to change their attitudes. Ellis’s interest in
          philosophy led him to the works of great Asian and Greek thinkers including Confucius,
          Lao Tze, Marcus Aurelius, and Epictetus. He had been advising clients based on these
          philosophical works. Ellis was intrigued by the philosophers’ notion that people can
          choose whether or not they become disturbed, or in the words of Epictetus, “Men [and
          women] are not disturbed by things, but by the view which they take of them” (from
          the Enchiridion). Ellis utilized this philosophy as the foundation for his new therapy.
                                                                     
          In 1955, he formulated his theory in a paper delivered at the American Psychological
          Association. It was not until 1961 that his most influential self-help book with Robert
          Harper appeared, A Guide for Rational Living, now in its third edition having sold more
          than a million copies. The following year, Ellis (1962) published his first professional
          book, Reason and Emotion in Psychotherapy.                 
            Ellis originally named his therapy “Rational Therapy” because he focused on the role
          of cognitions. He later realized that he had underemphasized the role of emotions in
                                                                     
          the title and renamed it “Rational Emotive Therapy.” He finally changed the name to
          “Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy” (Ellis, 1994) at the urging of Ray Corsini. While
          revising his psychotherapy text, Corsini noticed that Ellis almost always used behavioral

=== Page 172 (1 cols) ===
158   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      interventions. He suggested that a new name would better represent what Ellis actually
      did and recommended it to Al.                                  
        In 1965, Ellis founded the Institute for Advanced Study in Rational Psychotherapy
      for professional training in his therapy. It survives today as the Albert Ellis Institute.
      Affiliated training centers that train mental health professionals exist in Argentina,
      Australia, Bosnia, Canada, Costa Rica, France, Germany, India, Israel, Italy, Mexico,
      the Netherlands, New Zealand, Pakistan, Paraguay, Romania, and Serbia. More than
      13,000 psychotherapists throughout the world have been trained by the Institute or its
      affiliated centers. Ellis was a prolific writer and he published more than 60 books and
      more than 700 peer-reviewed journal articles. A bibliography of his writing is avail-
      able at http://albertellis.org/albert-ellis-bibliography-page-1/. Prior to his death in 2007,
      Psychology Today described him as the “greatest living psychologist.”
        The institute sponsors the Journal of Rational Emotive and Cognitive Behavior Therapies,
      now under the editorship of Drs. Ray DiGiuseppe, Kristene Doyle, and Daniel David.
      OVERVIEW  AND THEORY                                           
      In the following section we detail the philosophical and theoretical assumptions of
      REBT, together with its view of psychopathology.               
      Philosophical Assumptions                                      
      As mentioned, REBT builds on some philosophical assumptions. The first of these is a
                                                                     
      commitment to the scientific method. Ellis believed that applying the scientific method
      to one’s personal life would make one more likely to give up dysfunctional, irrational
      beliefs that lead to emotional disturbance and ineffectual behavior. Ellis’s philosophy
      contains elements of constructivism, the philosophy of science, and epistemology.
      Specifically, Ellis maintained that all humans would be better off if they acknowledged
      that they create images or constructions of how the world is or ought to be. Ellis directly
      built his therapy on George Kelly’s (1955) famous work, The Psychology of Personal
                                                                     
      Constructs.                                                    
        Second, Ellis believed that people would be emotionally healthier if they recognized
      that all of their beliefs, schemata, perceptions, and cherished truths could be wrong.
      Testing one’s assumptions, examining the validity and functionality of one’s beliefs, and
      having a willingness to entertain alternative ideas helps one to develop new beliefs
      and schemata to guide one’s behavior. Rigid adherence to any belief or schema of the
      world prevents one from revising one’s thinking, and thus dooms one to behave as if
                                                                     
      the world is as one hopes it will be, rather than the way the world is. REBT differs
      from the Post-Modernist philosophers and the contructivist cognitive psychotherapists

=== Page 173 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 159
                                                                     
          such as Mahoney (1991) and Neimeyer (1993) in two ways (see Ruggiero, Ammendola,
          Caselli,&Sassaroli,2014).First,theconstructivistpsychotherapistsbelievethatthesole
                                                                     
          criterion to evaluate beliefs is their utility or viability. Empirical reality is not a criterion
          becausetheextremeconstructivistapproachmaintainsnoknowablerealityexists.REBT
          posits that empirical reality exists and it is important to assess the empirical veracity of
          one’s beliefs along with their utility and logical consistency.
            Second, modern constructivists believe that psychotherapists should wait for clients
          to find their own reality and not suggest alternative beliefs, as this represents an imposi-
          tion of another’s world view and is oppression. Constructivist psychotherapists believe
                                                                     
          that psychotherapists should not provide alternative beliefs for clients, but allow them to
          develop alternatives on their own. REBT posits that there are some rational alternative
          beliefs that will promote emotional adjustment.            
            REBT recommends (David, Lynn, & Ellis, 2010; DiGiuseppe et al., 2014, Ellis, 1994)
          that humans would function best if they adopted the epistemology of the philosophy of
          science, specifically the positions of Popper (1962) and Bartley (1987). Popper noted
          that all people develop hypotheses. Preconceived hypotheses distort the data one col-
                                                                     
          lects and lead to a confirmatory bias in reasoning. This renders objectivity in inductive
          data collection impossible. As humans, we cannot stop ourselves from forming hypothe-
          ses. The best solution is to acknowledge our hypotheses and attempt to falsify them. Pop-
          per maintained that knowledge accumulates and advances quickest when people deduce
          predictions from their hypotheses and collect data to disprove them. Bartley’s episte-
          mology of comprehensive critical rationalism adds that it is best if people use empirical
                                                                     
          falsifiablity tests, and any other argument one can muster to disprove one’s thinking.
          Ellis believed that it is best to apply any and all means to challenge one’s thinking as a
          theorist and as an individual. Accordingly, psychotherapists would do best to challenge
          their ideas about their clients and to teach their clients to do the same to their beliefs.
            REBT maintains that certain values promote emotional adjustment and mental
          health (DiGiuseppe et al., 2014; Ellis, 1994). REBT practitioners attempt to develop
          attitudes and behaviors that reflect these values.         
                                                                     
          Values of Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy                
                                                                     
            Self-acceptance. Healthy people choose to accept themselves unconditionally,
               rather than measure themselves, rate themselves, or try to prove themselves.
            Risk-taking. Emotionally healthy people choose to take risks and have a spirit of
               adventurousness in trying to do what they want to do, without being foolhardy.
            Nonutopian. We are unlikely to get everything we want or to avoid everything we
                                                                     
               find painful. Healthy people do not waste time striving for the unattainable or
               for unrealistic perfection.

=== Page 174 (1 cols) ===
160   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
         High-frustration tolerance. Paraphrasing St. Francis, healthy people recognize that
           there are only two sorts of problems they are likely to encounter: those they
           can do something about and those they cannot. Once this discrimination has
           been made, the goal is to modify those obnoxious conditions we can change,
           and accept, or lump, those we cannot change.              
         Self-responsibility for disturbance. Rather than blaming others, the world, or the
           fates for their distress, healthy individuals accept a good deal of responsibility
           for their own thoughts, feelings, and behaviors.          
         Self-interest. Emotionally healthy people tend to put their interests at least a little
           above the interests of others. They sacrifice themselves to some degree for those
           for whom they care, but not overwhelmingly or completely. 
         Social interest. Most people choose to live in social groups. To do so most comfort-
           ably and happily, they would be wise to act morally, protect the rights of others,
           and aid in the survival of the society in which they live.
         Self-direction. We would do well to cooperate with others, but it would be better for
           us to assume primary responsibility for our own lives rather than to demand or
           need considerable support or nurturance from others.      
         Tolerance. It is helpful to allow humans (the self and others) the right to be wrong.
           It is not appropriate to like obnoxious behavior, but it is not necessary to damn
           the human for doing it.                                   
         Flexibility. Healthy individuals tend to be flexible thinkers. Rigid, bigoted, and
           invariant rules tend to minimize happiness.               
         Acceptance of uncertainty.Weliveinafascinatingworldofprobabilityandchance;
           absolute certainties probably do not exist. The healthy individual strives for
           some degree of order, but does not demand perfect certainty.
         Commitment. Most people, especially bright and educated ones, tend to be happier
           when vitally absorbed in something outside themselves. At least one strong cre-
           ativeinterestandsomeimportanthumaninvolvementseemtoprovidestructure
           for a happy daily existence.                              
      Theoretical Assumptions                                        
      REBT assumptions about psychopathology and change appear below.
                                                                     
        These six principles can be summarized as follows:           
         1. Cognitions or beliefs are the most proximate and identifiable cause of human
                                                                     
           disturbance.                                              
         2. Irrational, illogical, and anti-empirical beliefs lead to unhealthy, disturbed
           emotions. Rational beliefs will lead to healthy, adaptive emotions and mental
           health.

=== Page 175 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 161
                                                                     
            3. The best way to change our emotional disturbance is to change our thinking.
            4. Humans have a biological predisposition to learn to think both rationally and
                                                                     
              irrationally and to get themselves upset. However, culture and family teach peo-
              ple the specific issues that they will become upset about.
            5. Both nature and nurture influence how and whether people develop unhealthy
              disturbed emotions; the reason people stay upset is because they rehearse their
              irrational beliefs and reindoctrinate themselves with what they were taught.
            6. Change is difficult and people are most likely to change with repeated efforts
              to challenge their dysfunctional thoughts and rehearse new rational, adaptive
                                                                     
              beliefs.                                               
                                                                     
            Many theorists and practitioners ascribing to all forms of CBT think that cognitions
          cause emotions and behavior. A more modern view acknowledges that thinking, feeling,
          and behaving are interconnected elements, with each aspect of experience influencing
          the others. People think, feel, and behave simultaneously. It follows then, that what
          peoplethinkaffectsthewaytheyfeel,thatpeoplerarelyfeeland/oractwithoutthinking,
                                                                     
          and that the way people behave influences what they feel and think. There are two
          implications of these theoretical assumptions.             
            First, one can assess one element of experience by asking the person to focus on that
          element while experiencing another element. For example, one can assess irrational
          beliefs by asking people to focus on what they are thinking while they are performing
          the target behavior or experiencing the target emotion. Second, psychotherapy includes
          cognitive, emotive, and behavioral techniques to achieve success. Cognitions might be
                                                                     
          the focal point of much discussion not because of their primacy, but because of their util-
          ity. People often can describe what they are thinking and entertain challenges to their
          thoughts or new thoughts easier than they can do new behaviors or “feel” emotions.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          VIEW OF PSYCHOPATHOLOGY                                    
                                                                     
          The writing of Albert Ellis and other REBT theorists have included in their work a
          specific theory on the cognitive mechanism of psychopathology that differs from other
          cognitive approaches. This theory directly influences the content of its theory and prac-
          tice of psychotherapy.                                     
                                                                     
          Adaptive and Maladaptive Emotions                          
                                                                     
          REBT distinguishes between disturbed, dysfunctional emotions and normal, motivat-
          ing, albeit negative emotions. The presence of negative emotions is not evidence of
          psychopathology. Negative emotions are adaptive (Darwin, 1872), and their elimina-
          tion is not the goal of psychotherapy. If an activating event occurs (A) and one thinks

=== Page 176 (1 cols) ===
162   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      irrationally (B), one will experience a disturbed emotion such as anxiety or depres-
      sion (C). If one then challenges one’s irrational belief and replaces it with a rational
      belief (a new B), what will cause a new emotional consequence (the new C)? If the
      unpleasant activating event is still present, it would be inappropriate or unrealistic to
      expect a person to feel neutral or good after the challenging of his or her irrational
      beliefs. What does one feel if the intervention is successful? The answer is a negative,
      nondisturbed, motivating emotion. Some psychotherapists conceptualize therapeutic
      improvement as a quantitative shift in the emotion. Often psychotherapists ask clients
      to rate their emotion on the SUDS scale (Subjective Units of Discomfort) developed
      by Wolpe (1990). Therapy is successful if the SUDS rating demonstrates much less of
      the emotion.                                                   
        Emotions differ by their intensity of physiological arousal, phenomenological expe-
      rience, means of social expression, and the behaviors that they elicit. Ellis (1994; Ellis
      & DiGiuseppe, 1993) proposed that when people think rational thoughts, they actually
      experience a qualitatively different emotion rather than less intensity of the disturbed
      emotion. The emotions generated by rational thoughts will be in the same family of
      emotions as the disturbed emotion, but they differ in many aspects. Ellis posits that
      although irrational thinking leads to anxiety, depression, or anger, rational thinking will
      lead to concern, sadness, and annoyance, respectively. These emotions are not neces-
      sarily less intense but they may lead to qualitatively different phenomenological expe-
      riences, and to different forms of expression, and they will elicit different behavioral
      reactions. A good example of this principle is Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s emotional
      response to racism. Dr. King had an intense emotional reaction to racism, but it led to
      problem-solving, commitment, high frustration tolerance, and goal-directed behavior.
      The English language often fails to provide a lexicon to label such emotions. Emotional
      disturbance may correlate with the intensity of the physiological arousal but this is dif-
      ferent from the intensity of the phenomenological feeling. Disturbance could also be
      characterized as an emotion that results in dysfunctional behavior or alienating social
      expression. Nondisturbed emotion elicits problem-solving, coping, and social cohesion.
      REBT focuses on the qualitative differences in emotion and rejects the notion, implicit
      inmanytheories,thatemotionsdifferonlyquantitatively.Rationalbeliefselicitadaptive
      emotions that lead to adaptive responses and social communications.
        REBT utilizes the script theories of emotions (DiGiuseppe & Tafrate, 2007) and
      believes that clients need to learn adaptive emotional scripts, and not just change the
      intensity of their feelings. As a result, psychotherapists are very careful in the words they
      use to describe emotions and to help clients to choose which emotions they might like
      to feel in place of their disturbed emotion. They help clients formulate a vocabulary
      to describe adaptive, albeit negative, affective states that they could feel instead of the
      disturbed emotions.

=== Page 177 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 163
                                                                     
          Irrational Beliefs and Emotional Disturbance               
                                                                     
          Ellis originally identified 11 irrational beliefs that led to emotional disturbance (Ellis,
          1994). Over the years, the list of irrational beliefs has dwindled to four and more recently
          (Ellis&Dryden,1997)downtoone,demandingness(Davidetal.,2010).Themajorthe-
          oretical problems REBT needs to address are: (a) which cognitive processes or irrational
                                                                     
          beliefs lead to emotional disturbance? And (b) how does irrational thinking initiate
          strong, sustained emotional disturbance?                   
            There are a number of cognitive-behavioral therapies, each of which posits some
          type of cognitive process or cognitive content that leads to emotional disturbance and
          that is remediated by the respective therapy. A number of types of cognitions have
          been proposed to mediate psychopathology, such as attributions (Seligman, 1991),
                                                                     
          negative erroneous automatic thoughts (Beck, 2005), behavior guiding self-statements
          (Meichenbaum, 1993), beliefs in self-efficacy (Bandura, 1986), and core schemata
          (Beck, Freeman, Davis, & Associates, 2003). If psychotherapists are to develop
          treatment plans, it is important to understand all these constructs and how they may
          interact with each other and lead to psychopathology.      
            Originally, Ellis’s theory presented irrational beliefs as ideas separate from these other
                                                                     
          constructs in a linear model of causation of emotional disturbance. Maultsby (1975)
          defined three criteria for irrational beliefs. To be irrational, a belief is illogical, inconsis-
          tent with empirical reality, or inconsistent with accomplishing one’s long-term goals.
          These criteria are similar to those that Kuhn (1970), the historian of science, pro-
          posed scientists use to evaluate theories: logical consistency, empirical predictability,
          and heuristic or functional value.                         
                                                                     
            Irrational beliefs were originally conceptualized as being independent from the con-
          structs of other cognitive theories because they were more evaluative in nature. This
          distinction failed to be maintained because some of Ellis’s original irrational beliefs are
          factual errors. Irrational beliefs actually have the same characteristics as rigid, inaccurate
          schemata (David et al., 2010; DiGiuseppe et al., 2014; Dryden, DiGiuseppe, & Neenan,
          2010). In fact, DiGiuseppe (1996) and Ellis (1996) proposed that it would be more
                                                                     
          accurate to call them irrational schemata than irrational beliefs. REBT construes irra-
          tional beliefs as tacit, unconscious, broad-based schemata that operate on many levels.
          Schemata are sets of expectations about the way the world is, the way it ought to be,
          and what is good or bad in what is and ought to be. Schemata help people organize their
          world by influencing (a) the information to which a person attends; (b) the perceptions
          the person is likely to draw from sensory data; (c) the inferences or automatic thoughts
                                                                     
          the person is likely to conclude from the data one perceives; (d) the beliefs one has in
          one’s ability to complete tasks; (e) the evaluations a person makes of the actual or per-
          ceived world; and (f) the solutions that a person is likely to conceive to solve problems.

=== Page 178 (1 cols) ===
164   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                    Level 3: Core Irrational Belief: Demandingness:  
                          “I must be liked by others.”               
                            Level I: Automatic                       
                              Thoughts:                              
                           “He does not like me.”                    
            Level I:                                                 
           Perceptions:                                              
          “He didn’t want to                                         
           notice me.”                                               
                                                Level I: Negative    
                                                  Attributions:      
                                                “I am not likeable.” 
                         Disturbed Emotion: Depression               
         Level 2: Derivative—                                        
            Awfulizing:                                              
          “It is awful he does                                       
            not like me.”                                            
                            Level 2: Derivative                      
                            Global Evaluation of                     
                               Self:                                 
                            “I am worthless if I                     
                             am not liked.”                          
                                             Level 2: Derivative—    
                                            Frustration Intolerance: 
                                            “I can’t stand not being 
                                                 liked.”             
      Figure 6.1 Three Levels of Cognitions Leading to Emotional Disturbance. Source: Adapted from The
      Three Levels of Cognitions Influencing Emotional Disturbance. From DiGiuseppe et al. (2014).
      Conceptualizing irrational beliefs as schemata means they are both factual and eval-
      uative in nature. They predict what is and what is good. Irrational beliefs/schemata
      influence other hypothetical cognitive constructs that are mentioned in other forms
      of CBT. Figure 6.1 represents how irrational beliefs relate to other cognitive constructs
      and emotional disturbance. The model suggests that interventions aimed at the level of
      irrational beliefs/schemata will change other types of cognitions as well as emotional dis-
      turbance; interventions aimed at other cognitive processes may, but will not necessarily,
      influence the irrational schema.                               
        Modern REBT proposes that at least three levels of cognitions lead to emotional
      arousal and disturbance (shown in Figure 6.1). The first level of thoughts that imme-
      diately occurs is what William James (1890/1950) referred to as the stream of conscious-
      ness. Most people have a consistent monologue going on in their heads throughout their
      waking hours. These initial, first-level cognitions are inferential in nature. All humans
      have their own, unique perceptions of reality. Inferential cognitions are the conclusions
      onedrawsfromtheseperceptions.Forexample,supposeyouarewalkingdowntheschool
      corridor and see a fellow student approaching you. You wave your arm in greeting, but
      your gesture is not returned. You might infer from this event that the student did not

=== Page 179 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 165
                                                                     
          see you. Or, you could infer that the student saw you and decided not to greet you. You
          could even go further and infer that the absence of a greeting has some interpersonal
                                                                     
          meaning; perhaps the student is angry with you or does not like you, or that no one
          at work likes you. These cognitions could be incorrect inferences, which can take the
          form of negative perceptions (e.g., “She/he doesn’t like me”). These inferences can be
          tested by collecting evidence for and against your conclusions to determine if they are
          actually true. Many of these inferential cognitive constructs have been associated with
          emotional disturbance and psychopathology (Beck, 2005).    
            The second-level cognitions are largely evaluative and are referred to in REBT as
                                                                     
          derivative irrational beliefs or evaluative beliefs—these are awfulizing, global evaluation
          of self/other/world, and frustration intolerance. REBT recognizes that these evaluative
          cognitions are more central to emotional disturbance than first-level inferential cog-
          nitions. The first-level inferential cognitions are correlated with psychopathology not
          because they are causative, but because most disturbed people hold these deeper lev-
          els of beliefs that evaluate and give importance to the first-level inferences, making
          them more significant in the development of emotional disturbance. These three types
                                                                     
          of second-level beliefs (awfulizing, global evaluation of self/other, and frustration intol-
          erance) evaluate the significance of the possible reality portrayed in the inference, the
          worth of the persons involved if the inference is true, or one’s appraisal of one’s abil-
          ity to cope with or tolerate the perceived situation. Awfulizing is an exaggeration of
          the negative consequences of a situation to an extreme degree, so that an unfortunate
          occurrence becomes “terrible.” Global evaluations of human worth, either of the self or
                                                                     
          others, imply that human beings can be rated as entire beings, and that some people are
          worthless, or at least less valuable than others. Frustration intolerance (also known as
          low frustration tolerance) stems from demands for ease and comfort, and reflects an intol-
          erance of discomfort. We call these beliefs derivatives because REBT posits that they are
          psychologically deduced from the more core schematic irrational beliefs.
            The third level of cognitions is schematic demands or imperatives, and they repre-
          sent the core irrational beliefs (IBs). These beliefs are tacit, sometimes unconscious,
                                                                     
          broad-based schemata. Many REBT and CBT therapists use the term unconscious to
          mean thoughts/beliefs that are out of our awareness, however, they can be accessed.
          Irrational beliefs are derived from the more central imperative demands, which are one’s
          thoughts about the way reality should be. With these thoughts people construct a phi-
          losophy about the world as they want it to be, not necessarily as it is. REBT posits that
          rigid thinking and the inability to accommodate to new information is the foundation of
          emotional disturbance. REBT maintains that cognitive flexibility, adapting to new sit-
                                                                     
          uations, and incorporating new information into personal schemata represents the core
          of psychological adjustment.

=== Page 180 (1 cols) ===
166   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        Because core irrational demandingness represents schemata, they serve the function
      of schema. They help people organize their world and influence aspects of thought such
      as: (a) the information to which a person attends, (b) the perceptions the person is likely
      to draw from sensory data, (c) the inferences or automatic thoughts the person is likely
      to conclude from the data he or she perceives, (d) the belief one has in one’s ability
      to complete tasks, (e) the evaluations a person makes of the actual or perceived world,
      and (f) the solutions that a person is likely to conceive to solve problems. Irrational
      demandingness beliefs/schemata influence other hypothetical cognitive constructs that
      are mentioned in other forms of CBT, such as perceptions, inferences, or negative auto-
      matic thoughts, and global, internal attributions of cause. Thus, REBT proposes that the
      demandingness beliefs are the cause of the other dysfunctional thoughts such as negative
      automatic thoughts, erroneous attributions, and overly negative evaluations.
        The discrimination between inferential cognitions, evaluative cognitions, and imper-
      ative/schematic cognitions (irrational beliefs) sets REBT apart from other forms of CBT.
      REBT acknowledges the importance of inferential processes and might use techniques
      to change these distorted cognitions. However, REBT recommends that therapy focus
      more on the level two and three cognitions. According to REBT, even if one thinks
      negative automatic thoughts, one can protect oneself from emotional disturbance about
      such potential realities if one thinks about them rationally, and give up the demand that
      such events must not happen.                                   
        People can have irrational beliefs about different content areas. The most common
      of these would be affiliation (being accepted or rejected), achievement (doing well or
      failing), comfort, and fairness. A model of irrational beliefs is shown in Table 6.1. On
      the horizontal dimension are types of irrational processes and on the vertical dimen-
      sion there are the content about which the person thinks irrationally. REBT proposes
      some hypotheses concerning which irrational beliefs are most involved in specific disor-
      ders. For example, global rating irrational beliefs about the self, most likely play a major
      role in depression, while global rating of others will lead to anger and contempt. Irra-
      tional beliefs about comfort with our emotional experiences have been proposed to play
      a prominent role in agoraphobia (Burgess, 1990). Awfulizing beliefs will lead to anxi-
      ety. Frustration intolerance irrational beliefs have been considered to be a crucial factor
      leading to procrastination.                                    
        Next we discuss these four irrational beliefs in more detail.
      Demandingness                                                  
                                                                     
      Demandingness is represented in English by the words “must,” “should,” “ought,” and
      “have to.” These words reflect a demand on how oneself, others, or the world must be.
      REBT makes the distinction between preferences and demands. Preferences are neither
      rationalnorirrational,theyjustare.Psychotherapistsdonotattempttochangeaperson’s

=== Page 181 (1 cols) ===
T                                           
                         a                                           
                         b                                           
                         l                                           
                         e                                           
                         6                                           
                         .                                           
                         1                                           
                         M                                           
                         o                                           
                         d                                           
                         e                                           
                         l                                           
                         o                                           
                         f                                           
                         I                                           
                         r                                           
                         r                                           
                         a                                           
                         t                                           
                         i                                           
                         o                                           
                         n                                           
                         a                                           
                         l                                           
                         B                                           
                         e                                           
                         l i                                         
                         e f                                         
                         s                                           
                         f                                           
                         r                                           
                         o                                           
                         m                                           
                         D                                           
                         i                                           
                         G                                           
                         i                                           
                         u                                           
                         s                                           
                         e                                           
                         p                                           
                         p                                           
                         e                                           
                         e                                           
                         t                                           
                         a                                           
                         l                                           
                         .                                           
                         (                                           
                         2                                           
                         0                                           
                         1                                           
                         4                                           
                         )                                           
                           M                                         
                           o                                         
                           d                                         
                           e                                         
                           l                                         
                           o                                         
                           f                                         
                           I                                         
                           r                                         
                           r                                         
                           a                                         
                           t                                         
                           i                                         
                           o                                         
                           n                                         
                           a                                         
                           l                                         
                           B e                                       
                           l i                                       
                           e                                         
                           f                                         
                           s                                         
                             I                                       
                             r                                       
                             r                                       
                             a                                       
                             t                                       
                             i                                       
                             o                                       
                             n                                       
                             a                                       
                             l                                       
                             P                                       
                             r                                       
                             o                                       
                             c                                       
                             e                                       
                             s s                                     
                                            B e l i e f C o n t e n t
                                D                                    
                                e                                    
                                m                                    
                                a                                    
                                n                                    
                                d i                                  
                                n                                    
                                g                                    
                                n                                    
                                e                                    
                                s                                    
                                s                                    
                                F                                    
                                r                                    
                                u                                    
                                s                                    
                                t                                    
                                r                                    
                                a                                    
                                t                                    
                                i                                    
                                o                                    
                                n                                    
                                 I                                   
                                 n                                   
                                 t                                   
                                 o                                   
                                 l                                   
                                 e                                   
                                 r                                   
                                 a                                   
                                 n                                   
                                 c                                   
                                 e                                   
                                 (                                   
                                 F                                   
                                 I                                   
                                 )                                   
                                A                                    
                                w                                    
                                f                                    
                                u l i                                
                                z                                    
                                i                                    
                                n                                    
                                g                                    
                                S                                    
                                e                                    
                                l                                    
                                f                                    
                                -                                    
                                W                                    
                                o                                    
                                r                                    
                                t                                    
                                h                                    
                                R                                    
                                a                                    
                                t                                    
                                i                                    
                                n                                    
                                g                                    
                                s                                    
                                O                                    
                                t                                    
                                h                                    
                                e                                    
                                r                                    
                                -                                    
                                W                                    
                                o                                    
                                r                                    
                                t                                    
                                h                                    
                                R                                    
                                a                                    
                                t                                    
                                i                                    
                                n                                    
                                g                                    
                                s                                    
                                   S                                 
                                   o                                 
                                   c                                 
                                   i                                 
                                   a                                 
                                   l                                 
                                   R                                 
                                   e                                 
                                   l                                 
                                   a                                 
                                   t                                 
                                   i                                 
                                   o                                 
                                   n                                 
                                   s                                 
                                   h                                 
                                   i                                 
                                   p                                 
                                   s                                 
                                   D                                 
                                   e                                 
                                   m                                 
                                   a                                 
                                   n                                 
                                   d i                               
                                   n                                 
                                   g                                 
                                   a                                 
                                   b                                 
                                   o                                 
                                   u                                 
                                   t                                 
                                     a                               
                                     f                               
                                     fi l                            
                                     i                               
                                     a t i                           
                                     o                               
                                     n                               
                                   F                                 
                                   I                                 
                                   a                                 
                                   b                                 
                                   o                                 
                                   u                                 
                                   t                                 
                                   a                                 
                                   f                                 
                                   fi                                
                                   l                                 
                                   i                                 
                                   a t                               
                                   i                                 
                                   o                                 
                                   n                                 
                                   A                                 
                                   w                                 
                                   f                                 
                                   u l i                             
                                   z i                               
                                   n                                 
                                   g                                 
                                   a                                 
                                   b                                 
                                   o                                 
                                   u                                 
                                   t                                 
                                     a                               
                                     f                               
                                     fi l i                          
                                     a                               
                                     t                               
                                     i                               
                                     o                               
                                     n                               
                                   S                                 
                                   e                                 
                                   l                                 
                                   f                                 
                                   -                                 
                                   c                                 
                                   o                                 
                                   n                                 
                                   d                                 
                                   e                                 
                                   m                                 
                                   n                                 
                                   i                                 
                                   n                                 
                                   g                                 
                                   a                                 
                                   b                                 
                                   o                                 
                                   u                                 
                                   t                                 
                                     a f                             
                                     fi l                            
                                     i                               
                                     a t                             
                                     i                               
                                     o                               
                                     n                               
                                   O                                 
                                   t                                 
                                   h                                 
                                   e                                 
                                   r                                 
                                   -                                 
                                   c                                 
                                   o                                 
                                   n                                 
                                   d                                 
                                   e                                 
                                   m                                 
                                   n                                 
                                   i                                 
                                   n                                 
                                   g                                 
                                     a                               
                                     b                               
                                     o                               
                                     u                               
                                     t                               
                                     a                               
                                     f                               
                                     fi                              
                                     l                               
                                     i                               
                                     a                               
                                     t                               
                                     i                               
                                     o                               
                                     n                               
                                      A                              
                                      c                              
                                      h                              
                                      i                              
                                      e                              
                                      v                              
                                      e                              
                                      m                              
                                      e                              
                                      n                              
                                      t                              
                                      D                              
                                      e                              
                                      m                              
                                      a                              
                                      n                              
                                      d i                            
                                      n                              
                                      g                              
                                      a                              
                                      b                              
                                      o                              
                                      u                              
                                      t                              
                                        a                            
                                        c                            
                                        h                            
                                        i                            
                                        e v                          
                                        e                            
                                        m                            
                                        e                            
                                        n                            
                                        t                            
                                      F                              
                                      I                              
                                      a                              
                                      b                              
                                      o                              
                                      u                              
                                      t                              
                                      a                              
                                      c                              
                                      h                              
                                      i                              
                                      e v                            
                                      e                              
                                      m                              
                                      e                              
                                      n                              
                                      t                              
                                      A                              
                                      w                              
                                      f                              
                                      u l i                          
                                      z i                            
                                      n                              
                                      g                              
                                      a                              
                                      b                              
                                      o                              
                                      u                              
                                      t                              
                                        a                            
                                        c                            
                                        h i                          
                                        e                            
                                        v                            
                                        e                            
                                        m                            
                                        e                            
                                        n                            
                                        t                            
                                      S                              
                                      e                              
                                      l                              
                                      f                              
                                      -                              
                                      c                              
                                      o                              
                                      n                              
                                      d                              
                                      e                              
                                      m                              
                                      n                              
                                      i                              
                                      n                              
                                      g                              
                                      a                              
                                      b                              
                                      o                              
                                      u                              
                                      t                              
                                        a                            
                                        c                            
                                        h                            
                                        i                            
                                        e v                          
                                        e                            
                                        m                            
                                        e                            
                                        n                            
                                        t                            
                                      O                              
                                      t                              
                                      h                              
                                      e                              
                                      r                              
                                      -                              
                                      c                              
                                      o                              
                                      n                              
                                      d                              
                                      e                              
                                      m                              
                                      n                              
                                      i                              
                                      n                              
                                      g                              
                                        a                            
                                        b                            
                                        o                            
                                        u                            
                                        t                            
                                        a                            
                                        c                            
                                        h                            
                                        i                            
                                        e                            
                                        v                            
                                        e                            
                                        m                            
                                        e                            
                                        n                            
                                        t                            
                                         C                           
                                         o                           
                                         m                           
                                         f                           
                                         o                           
                                         r                           
                                         t                           
                                         D                           
                                         e                           
                                         m                           
                                         a                           
                                         n                           
                                         d i                         
                                         n                           
                                         g                           
                                         a                           
                                         b                           
                                         o                           
                                         u                           
                                         t                           
                                           c                         
                                           o                         
                                           m f                       
                                           o r                       
                                           t                         
                                         F                           
                                         I                           
                                         a                           
                                         b                           
                                         o                           
                                         u                           
                                         t                           
                                         c                           
                                         o                           
                                         m f                         
                                         o                           
                                         r                           
                                         t                           
                                         A                           
                                         w                           
                                         f                           
                                         u l i                       
                                         z i                         
                                         n                           
                                         g                           
                                         a                           
                                         b                           
                                         o                           
                                         u                           
                                         t                           
                                           c                         
                                           o                         
                                           m                         
                                           f                         
                                           o                         
                                           r                         
                                           t                         
                                         S                           
                                         e                           
                                         l                           
                                         f                           
                                         -                           
                                         c                           
                                         o                           
                                         n                           
                                         d                           
                                         e                           
                                         m                           
                                         n                           
                                         i                           
                                         n                           
                                         g                           
                                         a                           
                                         b                           
                                         o                           
                                         u                           
                                         t                           
                                           c                         
                                           o                         
                                           m f                       
                                           o                         
                                           r                         
                                           t                         
                                         O                           
                                         t                           
                                         h                           
                                         e                           
                                         r                           
                                         -                           
                                         c                           
                                         o                           
                                         n                           
                                         d                           
                                         e                           
                                         m                           
                                         n                           
                                         i                           
                                         n                           
                                         g                           
                                           a                         
                                           b                         
                                           o                         
                                           u                         
                                           t                         
                                           c                         
                                           o                         
                                           m                         
                                           f                         
                                           o                         
                                           r                         
                                           t                         
                                            F                        
                                            a                        
                                            i                        
                                            r                        
                                            n                        
                                            e                        
                                            s                        
                                            s                        
                                            D                        
                                            e                        
                                            m                        
                                            a                        
                                            n                        
                                            d i                      
                                            n                        
                                            g                        
                                            a                        
                                            b                        
                                            o                        
                                            u                        
                                            t                        
                                              f                      
                                              a                      
                                              i                      
                                              r                      
                                              n                      
                                              e s                    
                                              s                      
                                            F                        
                                            I                        
                                            a                        
                                            b                        
                                            o                        
                                            u                        
                                            t                        
                                            f                        
                                            a                        
                                            i                        
                                            r                        
                                            n                        
                                            e s                      
                                            s                        
                                            A                        
                                            w                        
                                            f                        
                                            u l i                    
                                            z i                      
                                            n                        
                                            g                        
                                            a                        
                                            b                        
                                            o                        
                                            u                        
                                            t                        
                                              f                      
                                              a                      
                                              i                      
                                              r n                    
                                              e                      
                                              s                      
                                              s                      
                                            S                        
                                            e                        
                                            l                        
                                            f                        
                                            -                        
                                            c                        
                                            o                        
                                            n                        
                                            d                        
                                            e                        
                                            m                        
                                            n                        
                                            i                        
                                            n                        
                                            g                        
                                            a                        
                                            b                        
                                            o                        
                                            u                        
                                            t                        
                                              f                      
                                              a                      
                                              i                      
                                              r                      
                                              n                      
                                              e s                    
                                              s                      
                                            O                        
                                            t                        
                                            h                        
                                            e                        
                                            r                        
                                            -                        
                                            c                        
                                            o                        
                                            n                        
                                            d                        
                                            e                        
                                            m                        
                                            n                        
                                            i                        
                                            n                        
                                            g                        
                                              a                      
                                              b                      
                                              o                      
                                              u                      
                                              t                      
                                              f                      
                                              a                      
                                              i                      
                                              r                      
                                              n                      
                                              e                      
                                              s                      
                                              s                      
                                   167

=== Page 182 (1 cols) ===
168   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      “wants.” To quote Zajonc (1980), “Preferences need no inferences.” REBT posits that
      it is okay to want anything and no desire is a sign of pathology or normalcy except in
      the statistical sense. People’s desires do not cause disturbance. However, when people
      demand that their preferences are reality, they become disturbed. But how and why does
      demandingness lead to disturbance?                             
        Piaget (1963) noted that people revise their schema by assimilation or accommo-
      dation. REBT posits that people construct schemata of the world. Research has demon-
      strated that when people hold a schema and reality is discordant with their expectations,
      emotional upset occurs. The crucial event here is that our sensors detect information
      that is inconsistent with our expectations. When such a reality-expectation discrepancy
      occurs, people become startled or upset. Well-adjusted people become motivated by this
      emotional arousal to seek out further information and will revise their schema to be
      consistent with reality. That is, they accommodate their schema to fit reality.
        REBT posits that disturbed individuals continue to hold onto their existing schema
      and demand that the world be consistent with their conception of it. This results in
      increased emotional upset as their sensory information continues to supply informa-
      tion that the world is not complying. Thus, demandingness is actually believing and
      expecting that the world will be the way one prefers it to be. That is, they assimilate the
      discrepant information into their existing schema.             
        For example, an adolescent girl might think, “My parents must treat me fairly and let
      me do what I want.” Not only does she want her parents to allow her to do as she desires,
      but she believes that because she wants it, they must comply. She may be shocked when
      they punish her for transgressions of their rules, and she may continue to behave against
      their rules despite all the feedback that they disapprove of the behavior and will initiate
      consequences for it. Also, she may conclude that “Because I must do what I want, I
      cannot stand it if they do not let me.” Or “It is terrible and awful if my parents do not
      let me do what I want.”                                        
        Some irrational beliefs include demands about what one must do to be a worthwhile,
      valued person. For example, a recent client, Melissa, age 11, believed that she must be
      liked by a certain“in group” of peers in her class to be a “good person.” Melissa demanded
      that she be liked by this group of girls, and she recognized that they did not like her.
      Her demand was of her self-worth. She said “I must have their approval to be worth-
      while.” Her schema of human worth was rigidly linked to approval by certain others. No
      other characteristics counted. Attempts to demonstrate that she possessed other exem-
      plar traits and that she was esteemed by her family, teacher, and some peers outside the
      “in group” failed to change her self-worth. She neither assimilated nor accommodated
      her schema of her self-worth. Her demand was not on the way the world or others were,
      but on the criteria for her self-acceptance or worth.

=== Page 183 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 169
                                                                     
            Rational beliefs express preferential, flexible desires, whereas irrational cognitions
          express absolutistic, rigid needs. Rational beliefs leads to happiness and enables individ-
                                                                     
          uals to attain their goals and strive toward their potential; irrational beliefs lead people
          to be extremely disturbed and thwart the individuals’ ability to attain their goals, leading
          to unhappiness.                                            
                                                                     
          Awfulizing                                                 
          These beliefs are characterized by exaggerated negative evaluations and thoughts that
                                                                     
          something about oneself, others, or the world is terrible, awful, or catastrophic. One
          might say that, “It is awful if I do not have the approval of everyone around me.” Rorer
          (1989) suggested that when people hold such a belief they are unable to define just what
          awful or terrible is, or what catastrophe will occur. They are, in fact, uncertain of the
          outcome and define it as extremely bad. Rorer believes awfulizing is definitional. People
          arbitrarilyassignanextremelynegativevalencetoaneventandnevertestrealitytoseeif
          the occurrence of the event brings such negative consequences. The empirical argument
                                                                     
          against awfulizing thinking is best summarized by Mark Twain who said, “I have survived
          many a catastrophe that never occurred.” Rational thinking would acknowledge that
          some things are bad, but stress that they are survivable.  
                                                                     
          Frustration Intolerance                                    
          Ellis (2003a, 2003b) originally called this type of irrational belief low frustration tolerance,
                                                                     
          or LFT. Such beliefs imply that individuals cannot stand something they find frustrating,
          orthattheindividualsdonothavetheendurancetosurviveinitspresence.Forexample,
          someone who is addicted to caffeine might say, “I cannot stand feeling the slightest bit
          tired when I have all this work to do; I must have some coffee.” These beliefs are illog-
          ical as well, because, short of dying, one is actually tolerating whatever one claims one
          cannot stand. The term frustration intolerance (FI) appears more appropriate than Ellis’s
          term low frustration tolerance. Australian psychologist Dr. Marie Joyce pointed out that
                                                                     
          the term LFT can invalidate clients’ difficulties. While Dr. Joyce was working with par-
          ents of neurologically disabled children, she had difficulty getting these parents to follow
          behavior management strategies. The parents commented that it was too hard, and that
          they could not stand being so consistent with their children when they misbehaved.
          When Dr. Joyce challenged the parents’ LFT, they felt misunderstood. Dr. Joyce admit-
          ted that these parents had more difficulty raising their children than most other parents.
          In fact, they had been tolerating more frustration than most parents. The problem was
                                                                     
          not that the parents had LFT, but that they did not have sufficient frustration toler-
          ance. They needed to have greater frustration tolerance than the average parent if they
          wished to accomplish their goal of getting their children to behave better. Dr. Joyce

=== Page 184 (1 cols) ===
170   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      suggests that the unwillingness to sustain or tolerate the degree of frustration necessary
      to achieve one’s goals be labeled frustration intolerance. This prevents psychotherapists
      from invalidating the difficulties of people who are intolerant of the frustration needed
      to accomplish their goals but who have experienced more frustration than most people.
      Global Condemnation of Human Worth                             
      These beliefs consist of negative evaluations of oneself, others, or the world, such as
      “I must be worthless if I do not have the approval of everyone around me.” Ellis (1994,
      2005c)statedthatapersoncannotberatedaseithergoodorbadbecauseitisnotpossible
      for one to be completely good or bad due to people’s complexity. Instead, ratings should
      be restricted to people’s behaviors. It is more logical, and certainly healthier to state that
      “Iperformedpoorlyonthemathtest,”insteadofsayinginaddition,“therefore,Iamabad
      student.” Ellis’s position is a philosophical one. He proposed that people take seriously
      the Preamble to the U.S. Constitution or the Judeo-Christian religious tradition, both of
      which state that all persons are created equal, the former by government and the latter
      by God. REBT teaches people to rate their deeds and not themselves. As the proverb
      goes, “Hate the sin, but love the sinner.” Self-evaluations are replaced with what Ellis
      calls USA, unconditional self-acceptance (see Bernard, 2013, for the most updated review
      of this concept).                                              
        REBT opposes the self-esteem movement popular in education today. Self-esteem is
      a combination of two different cognitive processes. The first is self-efficacy, which is
      the belief that one can in fact adequately perform a task. If you search the items of
      self-esteem scales, you will notice that many items reflect this type of statement. The
      second is self-evaluation. This involves making conclusions about one’s worth as a per-
      son. Humans often get these two confused and evaluate their worth, or lack of it, based
      on perceived self-efficacy or lack of it. For example, an adolescent recently seen in psy-
      chotherapyconcludedthatbecausehecouldnotreadaswellasotherchildrendid,hewas
      “no good” as a person. He had negative self-efficacy and negative global self-evaluation.
        Bernard, Vernon, Terjesen, and Kurasaki (2013) have discussed the concept of
      self-acceptance versus self-esteem in children and adolescents. They argued that
      self-esteem programs either teach children that they are special or good people because
      they are efficacious or that they directly teach people unwarranted self-efficacy. REBT
      points out two difficulties with such programs. First, they teach the children that they
      have self-worth because of self-efficacy. This could be fine for the moment; but what
      if their skills falter or they are surpassed by their peers to a great degree? The mental
                                                                     
      health of such children could be on a roller coaster. They feel good when they perform
      well, and they feel worthless when they perform badly. Second, these programs often
      teach self-efficacy beyond the child’s skills. They are likely to collapse emotionally when
      they can no longer get feedback that they are effective. Third, self-esteem programs

=== Page 185 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 171
                                                                     
          fail to provide coping strategies for poor performance. Because most people fail on
          the way to success, or fail more often than they succeed, people need to cope with
                                                                     
          performing poorly.                                         
            Consider the case of an 8-year-old special education student originally referred for
          depression and social isolation. Another professional had taught him to play basketball
          and had taught him that he was special because he had done well at basketball. The boy
          was fine for several days, until he bragged about his athletic skills to some neighborhood
          peers. When they trounced him in a game, he became depressed. Teaching children
          that they are worthwhile people even when others outperform them or when they
                                                                     
          perform poorly is most important for working with many of the exceptional children
          we encounter.                                              
            As mentioned, each of the irrational beliefs can be applied to oneself, others, or the
          world. Ellis proposed that irrational beliefs directed toward the self often result in depres-
          sion, anxiety, obsessiveness, self-hatred, and even suicide. Irrational beliefs directed
          toward others frequently lead to feelings such as anger, contempt, and rage. Moreover,
          irrational beliefs about the conditions of the world can lead to depression, anger, and
                                                                     
          dysfunctional behaviors such as procrastination and addiction (David et al., 2010).
            Table 6.2 presents examples of common referral problems of children and adoles-
          cents,theirbehavioralandemotionalconsequences,andcorrespondingirrationalbeliefs
          (Griger & Boyd, 1989).                                     
                                                                     
          Research Support                                           
                                                                     
          Many studies have correlated irrational beliefs to measures of emotional disturbance.
          However, little research specifically tests Ellis’s revised theory, that demandingness is
          the core irrational belief from which all the others are derived and that emotional dis-
          turbance can be explained best by demands people put on themselves, others, and the
          world. The empirical evidence does not totally support the revised theory. It has been
          found (see Kendall et al., 1995; and David et al., 2010, for reviews) that subscales of frus-
          tration intolerance (FI) and self-downing beliefs correlate more strongly with emotional
                                                                     
          disturbance than subscales of demandingness or awfulizing beliefs. Also, several factor
          analyses have indicated that there are two distinct categories of irrational beliefs. These
          studies have found that demandingness, awfulizing, and frustration intolerance items
          factor together, as Ellis had assumed they would. Thus, demandingness, awfulizing, and
          FI could be different aspects of the same psychological construct. Items reflecting nega-
          tive self-ratings loaded on as separate factors by themselves (Bernard, 1998; DiGiuseppe,
                                                                     
          1988). Some research has shown (David et al., 2010; David, Schnur, & Belloiu, 2002;
          Smith, Haynes, Lazarus, & Pope, 1993) that both demandingness as primary appraisal
          process and awfulizing as secondary appraisals are significant predictors of high anxiety,
          while depression is predicted by demandingness (primary appraisal) and self-downing

=== Page 186 (1 cols) ===
T a                                                             
     b l                                                             
     e                                                               
     6 .                                                             
     2                                                               
     R                                                               
     e                                                               
     f                                                               
     e                                                               
     r r a l                                                         
     P                                                               
     r o b l e                                                       
     m s , B e h a v i o                                             
     r                                                               
     a l                                                             
     C o n s                                                         
     e                                                               
     q                                                               
     u                                                               
     e                                                               
     n                                                               
     c                                                               
     e s , E m o t                                                   
     i                                                               
     o                                                               
     n                                                               
     a                                                               
     l                                                               
     C                                                               
     o                                                               
     n                                                               
     s                                                               
     e                                                               
     q                                                               
     u                                                               
     e n c e s , a n d C o r r e s p o n d i n g I r r a t i o n a l B e l i e f s
        P r o                                                        
        b l                                                          
        e                                                            
        m                                                            
        B                                                            
        e h a v i                                                    
        o r                                                          
        a l “ C                                                      
        ”                                                            
        E                                                            
        m o t i o n a l “                                            
        C                                                            
        ”                                                            
        I                                                            
        r                                                            
        r a t i o n a l B e l i e f s                                
          W i                                                        
          t h                                                        
          d r                                                        
          a                                                          
          w                                                          
          a                                                          
          l                                                          
          ,                                                          
            a                                                        
            v                                                        
            o i                                                      
            d a                                                      
            n                                                        
            c                                                        
            e                                                        
          A                                                          
          v o i d a                                                  
          n                                                          
          c e o f                                                    
          p e o p l e a n d t a s                                    
          k                                                          
          s , s                                                      
          h y n e s                                                  
          s                                                          
          ,                                                          
            a n d                                                    
            d e                                                      
            p e n d                                                  
            e n c y                                                  
          A                                                          
          n x i e t y a n                                            
          d                                                          
          f                                                          
          e                                                          
          a                                                          
          r                                                          
          s                                                          
            F                                                        
            e e l i n g s o f i                                      
            n                                                        
            f                                                        
            e                                                        
            r                                                        
            i                                                        
            o                                                        
            r                                                        
            i                                                        
            t                                                        
            y                                                        
             D                                                       
             e p r e s s i o n                                       
             (                                                       
             s                                                       
             e c                                                     
             o                                                       
             n                                                       
             d                                                       
             a                                                       
             r                                                       
             y                                                       
             )                                                       
          I                                                          
          m u s t d o w e l l a n d b e a p p r o v e d o f . I m u s t a v o i d g e t t i n g n o t i c e d a t a l l c o s t s , b e c a u s e i f I t r y , I w i l l f a i l a n d b e d i s a p p r o v e d o f . T h a t w o u l d b e t e r r i b l e a n d I w o u l d b e w o r t h l e s s . S o a s l o n g a s I c a n b e l e f t a l o n e a n
             d                                                       
               n o t h i n g i s d e m a n d e d o f m e , m y w o r t h l e s s n e s s w i l l n o t b e o b v i o u s a n
               d                                                     
                I w o n ’ t f e e l w o r t h l e s s .              
                  P e r                                              
                  f e                                                
                  c t i                                              
                  o                                                  
                  n                                                  
                  i                                                  
                  s                                                  
                  m                                                  
                  C                                                  
                  o m p u                                            
                  l s                                                
                  i v e n e                                          
                  s s , o v e r a c h i e v                          
                  i                                                  
                  n g ,                                              
                   o v e r                                           
                   d r                                               
                   i v i n g                                         
                   t o e x c e l                                     
                  F                                                  
                  e e l i n g o k a                                  
                  y                                                  
                  w                                                  
                  h                                                  
                  e                                                  
                  n                                                  
                  t                                                  
                  h                                                  
                  e                                                  
                  y                                                  
                   s u c c e e d                                     
                     A                                               
                     n x i e t y b e f                               
                     o                                               
                     r                                               
                     e                                               
                      p e r f o r m a                                
                      n                                              
                      c                                              
                      e                                              
                        D                                            
                        e p r e s s i o n ,                          
                        g                                            
                        u i                                          
                        l                                            
                        t                                            
                        ,                                            
                         s e l f - d o w n                           
                         i                                           
                         n                                           
                         g                                           
                         w                                           
                         h                                           
                         e                                           
                         n                                           
                           t h e y f a i l                           
                  I                                                  
                  m u s t d o w e l l i n o r d e r t o g e t a t t e n t i o n a n d b e a p p r o v e d o f o r e l s e I w i l l b e l o s t a n d w o r t h l e s s . I m u s t a l w a y s d o m y v e r y b e s t . M y p e r f o r m a n c
                   e                                                 
                     a t s c h o o l a n d e v e r y w h e r e e l s e s h o u l d a l w a y s b e c o m p e t e n t .
                      I                                              
                      t                                              
                      ’ s t e r r i b l e t o d o p o o r l y a n d d o i n g p o o r l y s h o w s w h a t a n i n c o m p e t e n t p e r s o n I a m .
                         I                                           
                         f                                           
                         I d o n ’ t t o t a l l y a n d a l w a y s d o w e l l , t h e n I ’ m t o t a l l y a n d a l w a y s a f a i l u r
                         e                                           
                         .                                           
                            A t t                                    
                            e                                        
                            n t i                                    
                            o                                        
                            n                                        
                              s                                      
                              e e                                    
                              k i                                    
                              n                                      
                              g                                      
                            A                                        
                            c t i n g                                
                            a                                        
                            s t h e                                  
                            m o d e l c h i l d , c                  
                            u                                        
                            t e ,                                    
                            c h a r                                  
                            m                                        
                            i                                        
                            n                                        
                            g                                        
                            ,                                        
                              a c t i n                              
                              g                                      
                              a s t h                                
                              e c l a s s c l o w n ,                
                              s                                      
                              h o                                    
                              w i n g o                              
                              f                                      
                              f                                      
                              ,                                      
                               p e s t i                             
                               n                                     
                               e s s , h                             
                               e l p l e s s n e s s , d e           
                               p                                     
                               e n                                   
                               d e n c e                             
                            A                                        
                            n x i e t y                              
                              F                                      
                              e e l i n g s o f i                    
                              n                                      
                              f                                      
                              e                                      
                              r                                      
                              i                                      
                              o                                      
                              r                                      
                              i                                      
                              t                                      
                              y                                      
                               D                                     
                               e p r e s s i o n                     
                               (                                     
                               s                                     
                               e c                                   
                               o                                     
                               n                                     
                               d                                     
                               a                                     
                               r                                     
                               y                                     
                               )                                     
                            I                                        
                            m u s t b e n o t i c e d a t a l l c o s t s o r e l s e I a m l o s t a n d w o r t h l e s s . I m u s t b e l o v e d a n d a p p r o v e d o f , a l l t h e t i m e . I t ’ s a w f u l t o g o u n n o t i c e d o r u n a c k n o w l e d g e d .
                                 P o                                 
                                 w e                                 
                                 r                                   
                                  s                                  
                                  t r                                
                                  u g                                
                                  g l                                
                                  e                                  
                                  s                                  
                                 D                                   
                                 i s o b e                           
                                 d i                                 
                                 e n c e ,                           
                                 s t u b b o r n n e s s ,           
                                  u n c o                            
                                  o                                  
                                  p e r a t i                        
                                  v e n e s s , “ S m a r            
                                  t                                  
                                  - m                                
                                  o u t h i n                        
                                  g                                  
                                  ,                                  
                                  ”                                  
                                    h o s t i                        
                                    l i                              
                                    t y t o                          
                                    w a r d s t u d e n t s          
                                    w                                
                                    h o                              
                                    d o n o                          
                                    t                                
                                     a g r e e                       
                                 A                                   
                                 n g e r                             
                                  J                                  
                                  e                                  
                                  a l o u s y                        
                                 T                                   
                                 h e o n l y w a y I c a n f e e l l i k e s o m e b o d y i s t o d e f y p r e s s u r e a n d d o w h a t I w a n t . I m u s t w i n , b e c a u s e i f I d o n ’ t I a m a l o s e r . P e o p l e m u s t a c k n o w l e d g e t h a t I a m r i g h t . I m u s t b e o n t o p . P e o p l e s h o u l d g i v e m
                                    e                                
                                     a t t e n t i o n a n d a p p r o v a l b y m a k i n g m e N u m b e r 1 .
                                       P r o                         
                                       c r                           
                                       a s                           
                                       t i                           
                                       n                             
                                       a                             
                                       -                             
                                        t                            
                                        i o                          
                                        n                            
                                       L                             
                                       a z i n e s                   
                                       s ,                           
                                       s l o p p                     
                                       i n e s s , s e l f - i n d   
                                       u                             
                                       l g e                         
                                       n c e ,                       
                                        g r o u s                    
                                        i                            
                                        n g a n                      
                                        d g r i p i n g , n o n      
                                        c                            
                                        o m                          
                                        p l i a n c                  
                                        e                            
                                          w i t h                    
                                          a                          
                                          s s i g n                  
                                          m e n t s                  
                                       F r                           
                                       u s t r a t i o n             
                                        S                            
                                        e l f - p i t y              
                                          R                          
                                          e s e n t m e n t          
                                       I                             
                                       s h o u l d n ’ t h a v e t o w o r k s o h a r d t o g e t t h i n g s d o n e . I c a n ’ t s t a n d t o d o t h e s e b o r i n g t h i n g s n e c e s s a r y t o r e a c h s o m e g o a l . I t ’ s t o o h a r d a n d i t t a k e s t o o m u c h w o r k . I c a n ’ t s t a n d t o d e l a y p l e a s u r e . B e c a u s e I d o n ’ t l i k e i t a n d i t ’ s n o t f a i r , I s h o u l d n o t h a v e t o d o i t . I t ’ s e a s i e r a n d b e t t e
                                           r                         
                                             t o t a k e o n e ’ s p l e a s u r e n o w r a t h e r t h a n g e t p l e a s u r e l a t e r .
                                              R e                    
                                              v e                    
                                              n g                    
                                              e                      
                                              B                      
                                              u l l y i n            
                                              g ,                    
                                              p a s s i              
                                              v e / a g g r e s s i v e
                                                n o n c              
                                                o                    
                                                m p l i a            
                                                n c e , s t e a l i n g ,
                                                a                    
                                                g g r                
                                                e s s i o n          
                                              A                      
                                              n g e r                
                                                R                    
                                                e s e n t m e n t    
                                                 J                   
                                                 e                   
                                                 a l o u s y         
                                              P                      
                                              e o p l e s h o u l d / o u g h t / m u s t d o r i g h t b y m e . P e o p l e w h o d o w r o n g b y m e a r e w i c k e d a n d b l a m e w o r t h y a n d d e s e r v e t o b e p u n i s h e d a n d t o s u f f e
                                                r .                  
                                                 T h o s e w h o d o n o t g i v e m e a t t e n t i o n d e s e r v e t o b e h u r t . I m u s t f e e l s i g n i fi c a n t , a n d t h e o n l y w a y I c a n f e e l s i g n i fi c a n t i s t o h u r t o t h e r s a s m u c h a s I c a n .
                                                      D e            
                                                      p r            
                                                      e s s          
                                                      i              
                                                      o              
                                                      n              
                                                      L              
                                                      e t h a r g    
                                                      i              
                                                      c b e h        
                                                      a v i o r , e x c e s s i v
                                                      e              
                                                      s l e          
                                                      e p i n g ,    
                                                        s i g n i    
                                                        fi           
                                                        c a n t l    
                                                        o s s o r i n c r e a s e
                                                        o f a        
                                                        p p e t i t  
                                                        e            
                                                        ,            
                                                         w i t h     
                                                         d r         
                                                         a w i n     
                                                         g , v e r b a l e x p r e
                                                         s           
                                                         s i o       
                                                         n o f       
                                                           h e l p l 
                                                           e         
                                                           s s n e s s
                                                           a n d h o p e l e s s
                                                           n         
                                                           e s s     
                                                      G              
                                                      u i l t        
                                                        D            
                                                        e p r e s s i o n
                                                      I              
                                                      d i d a b a d t h i n g a n d I ’ m a b a d p e r s o n f o r h a v i n g d o n e i t . I m u s t b e t o t a l l y c o m p e t e n t a n d l o v e d o r e l s e I ’ m w o r t h l e s s . T h i s i s a h a s s l e ; i t ’
                                                        s            
                                                         t o o m u c h o f a h a s s l e ; I c a n ’ t s t a n d i t . P o o r m e .
                                172

=== Page 187 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 173
                                                                     
          (secondary appraisal). More recently David et al. (2014) obtained similar findings using
          qualitative methodology of coding the ABC models of trainees. There have been, how-
                                                                     
          ever, no direct tests of the idea that demandingness is the core from which the other
          irrational beliefs emerge.                                 
            Recent studies document the mediating role of specific irrational beliefs for the link
          between general irrational thinking and parenting distress. Moreover, in support of the
          elegant solution, they found that global evaluation of worth is proximal to parental dis-
          tress and mediating its relationship with self-efficacy and locus of control, while uncon-
          ditional self-acceptance is proximal to parental satisfaction.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Primary and Secondary Disturbance                          
          REBT posits two types of disturbances that result from irrational thinking. Primary
                                                                     
          emotional-behavioral disturbance arises when one thinks irrationally about concrete
          activating events. Secondary emotional-behavioral disturbance occurs when one
          thinks irrationally about ones’ primary emotional-behavioral disturbance. That is, the
          emotional consequence of a primary ABC becomes an activating event for a new ABC.
          Because people not only think about events they experience but also reflect on their
          own cognitions, emotions, and behaviors, irrational beliefs about one’s own thoughts,
          feelings, and actions often lead to secondary emotional disturbance. People can get
                                                                     
          depressed about being depressed, anxious about their anxiety, and angry at themselves
          for getting angry. Secondary emotional disturbance maintains one’s disturbed state.
          Considerable research exists to support the importance of this secondary emotional
          disturbance in the areas of anxiety disorder, and especially panic disorder. Barlow
          (1991) has gone so far as to state that all emotional disorders may be secondary
          disturbance. He believes that people often produce secondary disturbance after they
                                                                     
          experience nondisturbed emotions because of frustration intolerance over experiencing
          the nondisturbed emotions.                                 
            When a secondary disturbance does exist, attempts to intervene at the level of the
          primary disturbance usually fail. Whenever people think about how they upset them-
          selvesorwhatstrategiestheycouldusetoovercometheirprimarydisturbance,theyelicit
          their catastrophic thinking or frustration intolerance and bring on the secondary distur-
          bance. REBT recommends that psychotherapists treat the secondary disturbance first,
                                                                     
          and when finished, focus on the primary disturbance (DiGiuseppe et al., 2014; Dryden
          et al., 2010; Ellis & Dryden, 1997). Several other theorists have come to similar con-
          clusions and recommend that clients learn to tolerate their emotional disturbance as a
          means of preventing further escalation of their problems (Hayes, Strosahl, & Wilson,
          1999; Jacobson, 1992).

=== Page 188 (1 cols) ===
174   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      THERAPEUTIC  STRATEGIES AND  TECHNIQUES                        
      Below we will detail the strategies and techniques used in REBT with children, adoles-
      cents, and their families.                                     
      Unconditional Acceptance                                       
      Early in the history of psychotherapy, Ellis and Rogers (Ellis, 1959, 1994; Rogers, 1957)
      often debated the necessary and sufficient conditions for behavior change. Rogers
      believed that unconditional acceptance of the client by the psychotherapists was
      necessary and sufficient for human change. Ellis (1959) disagreed. He believed that
      unconditional acceptance of the client was neither necessary nor sufficient. However,
      he believed that it was highly facilitative of change.         
        Ellis (1959, 1962) believed that unconditional acceptance is not necessary for change
      because many people change without it or even without psychotherapy. People can
      change on their own by bibliotherapy,modeling, or other experiences. Recently research
      by Norcross, Krebs, and Prochaska (2011) has focused on how people change without
      therapy. They have found that a “relationship” is one of many processes that can lead to
      change. Ellis believed that unconditional acceptance is not sufficient for change because
      people who are unconditionally accepted must draw some conclusions about themselves
      based on the experiences of being accepted. Thus, some cognitive restructuring could
      result from these relationships. Many disturbed people who experience unconditional
      acceptance from psychotherapists have not changed. Once people deduce something
      about themselves because they have received unconditional acceptance, they need to
      rehearse it, because they will still have the same old well-rehearsed belief that they are
      worthless. Some people develop self-acceptance without the help of others.
        Many people have the misconception that REBT disregards the therapeutic rela-
      tionship, and much of the literature on REBT has spent little time discussing the issue.
      Ellis (1994; DiGiuseppe, 2011) always acknowledged that unconditional acceptance
                                                                     
      of the client is a crucial part of therapy. Research indicated that psychotherapists
      practicing REBT at Ellis’s Institute establish excellent therapeutic relationships with
      their clients (DiGiuseppe & Leaf, 1993). Ellis’s theory places a major emphasis on the
      role of self-devaluation as a cause of psychopathology, and attaining unconditional
      self-acceptance (USA) as a means of becoming emotionally adjusted. One place where
      clients can learn USA is from their psychotherapists’ acceptance of them.
        REBT maintains that psychotherapists’ acceptance of their client is a crucial part
                                                                     
      of therapy for several reasons. First, it provides a model for clients that their worth
      as people is not linked to any specific behavior. Second, the psychotherapists’ accep-
      tance of clients might be necessary if clients are to reveal their secret emotions, acts, or
      thoughts to the psychotherapists. Also, clients are much more likely to listen to their

=== Page 189 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 175
                                                                     
          psychotherapists and follow their advice if the clients are accepted by their psychother-
          apists. Third, psychotherapists also coach their clients to practice new ways of thinking
                                                                     
          and feeling about themselves.                              
            All psychotherapists, to be effective, need to learn how to communicate acceptance
          to their clients, and to develop an accepting attitude toward all humans, which will
          enable them to actually feel acceptance toward their clients.
            This behavioral and emotional skill is difficult to maintain when treating narcissistic,
          defiant, aggressive, or conduct-disordered children and adolescents. Often psychother-
          apists are confronted by children and adolescents who do despicable acts. How do we
                                                                     
          accept them? Recently, one of us (RD) treated a 15-year-old sex offender who chose
          kindergartners as victims. The client enjoyed and desired sexual contact with these
          young victims. Will accepting him lead him to falsely conclude that his psychother-
          apist approves of his performing such behaviors? If the psychotherapist takes a strong
          disapproving stand, will the boy reveal any more of his thoughts and desires to the
          psychotherapist again? These are the dilemmas that one faces daily in therapy. REBT
          (DiGiuseppe et al., 2014) has adopted a view also proposed in psychoanalytic ther-
                                                                     
          apy (Sherwood, 1990). It is important for psychotherapists to acknowledge and accept
          clients with the clients’ aberrant desires. However, it is also important to express dis-
          approval of acting on the desires, while accepting clients even though they have acted
          on such desires. Developing such attitudes toward humans may be a prerequisite for
          becoming an effective psychotherapist.                     
                                                                     
          Practical versus Emotional Solutions                       
                                                                     
          REBT distinguishes between practical and emotional solutions (DiGiuseppe et al.,
          2014; Ellis, 1994). A practical solution involves a problem-solving or skill-development
          approach that helps the client change the activating event. An emotional solution
          attempts to change the client’s emotional reaction to the activating event. Practical
          solutions try to change the As; emotional solutions try to change the Cs. For example,
          consider the case of a middle school child, Serge, who was disrespectful and angry with
                                                                     
          a teacher. Serge thought that his teacher disliked him because of the way he talked
          and the style of his clothes which, based on Serge’s reports, seemed accurate. Serge
          regaled in his “hip-hop” garb and slang, and the teacher made it clear that she found
          his choices unacceptable. One therapeutic strategy is to teach Serge to behave toward
          the teacher in a manner that would endear Serge to the teacher. This is a practical
          solution designed to change the activating event, the teacher’s disapproval of Serge.
                                                                     
          REBT recommends that psychotherapists seek an emotional solution first, for reasons
          that are apparent in the preceding case. Often there are no practical solutions, and
          clients must “bite-the-bullet” and learn to cope with harsh realities. Second, clients
          are more likely to learn problem-solving and behavioral skills after they have achieved

=== Page 190 (1 cols) ===
176   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
         Table 6.3 Comparison of the Practical and Emotional Solutions to Serge’s Problem
          Practical Solutions: Intervention                          
          to get the teacher to like Serge                           
                                  Emotional Solution: Reduce         
                                  Serge’s anger                      
           Problem Solving to generate                               
           new alternative prosocial                                 
           behaviors to endear Serge                                 
           to the teacher                                            
                 Or                                                  
                       Perception: The teacher                       
                       does not like me.                             
                                         Challenge the accuracy of the
                                         automatic thoughts that the 
                                         teacher dislikes Serge.     
          Role Play prosocial behaviors                              
          to endear Serge to the teacher                             
                                 Challenge the demand that the       
                                 teacher must like Serge and         
                                 the derivatives of awfulizing,      
                                 frustration tolerance, or           
                                 other-downing.                      
                                 Less disturbed and more             
                                 adaptive negative emotion.          
                                 Adaptive behavior towards           
                                 teacher’s disapproval and           
                                 consideration of new behaviors.     
      the emotional solution. In the case of Serge, REBT would recommend an emotional
      solution for several reasons. First, Serge might never succeed in getting the teacher to
      like him, and he might always have to deal with her rejection of him. Second, it is hard
      to improve your relationship with someone at whom you are angry. Serge would be
      more likely to endear himself to the teacher if he gave up his anger. Table 6.3 shows the
      alternative for the practical and emotional solutions that could be used in Serge’s case.
      The REBT interventions are in boxes with bolded and underlined text.
        Some trainees misinterpret REBT’s strategy of seeking the emotional solution first
      to mean that REBT only works on the emotional solution. They think that helping
      clients achieve the practical solution is selling out the stoic philosophical roots of REBT.
      However, one of REBT’s goals is to have clients lead happier lives. People can do this
      best if they can tolerate and handle hassle. It is not consistent with the theory that
      peopleshouldtoleratefrustrationwhentheydon’thaveto.However,REBTrecommends

=== Page 191 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 177
                                                                     
          that this intervention be done after an emotional solution, in case there is no practical
          solution, and because clients are best able to pursue practical solutions when they are
                                                                     
          not disturbed.                                             
          Philosophical/Elegant versus Inelegant Solutions           
                                                                     
          REBT posits that psychotherapists will help clients best achieve emotional solutions
          by changing clients’ core irrational beliefs instead of changing clients’ perceptions or
          automatic thoughts. Ellis referred to such interventions as “the elegant solution.” Ellis
                                                                     
          considered the philosophical/elegant solution preferable because it provides clients with
          acopingstrategythatcanbeusedtodealwithawidenumberofsimilarandpossiblymore
          negative activating events. Philosophical solutions promote more generalizable change
          across a wider array of situations.                        
            REBT posits that psychotherapists avoid interventions focused at changing percep-
          tion through reattributions or reframing, or correcting negative automatic thoughts.
          Ellis called such interventions “inelegant.” He considered them inelegant because they
                                                                     
          did not require a major philosophical change and could provide a coping strategy for
          a particular activating event, but not for a wide range of negative situations. Also, the
          reattribution, reframing, or changing of the automatic thought might be inconsistent
          with reality. That is, clients’ perceptions and inferences about reality could be accurate.
          Table 6.3 identifies the interventions for each type of hypothesized mediating cognition
          in the case of Serge, the angry middle school child mentioned earlier.
            The first three cognitive interventions, reframing, reattribution, and challenging the
                                                                     
          automaticthoughts, arelabeledasinelegant.Ineachofthese,the cognitiveintervention
          attempts to change Serge’s thinking to believe that the teacher is not as negative toward
          Serge as he believes. The reframing attributes positive motives to the teacher’ actions.
          The reattribution presents the problem as temporary, and challenging the automatic
          thought gets him to reevaluate whether the teacher behaves as negatively toward him as
          hethinks.EachoftheseinterventionsassumesthatSergehasoverestimatedtheteacher’s
          dislike of him. Each could work if Serge had overestimated the teacher’s dislike of him.
                                                                     
          However, what if Serge is correct? Suppose the teacher does feels prejudiced against him
          because of his dress, his speech, his ethnic heritage, his taste in music, or for any other
          reason? These solutions could invalidate Serge’s perception and will fail to provide him
          with a coping strategy for the continuing disapproval from the teacher.
            The social problem-solving intervention helps Serge achieve the practical solution,
          and we know this will result in less emotional disturbance because Serge could entertain
                                                                     
          the idea that the “A” can change. However, the teacher might be so negative toward
          Serge that no actions could be successful. REBT almost always uses the elegant strategy.
          After Serge accepts that the teacher might never like him, the REBT hypothesis is that

=== Page 192 (1 cols) ===
178   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Serge will do even better problem-solving if he is less upset. He will also be able to cope
      if the alternative solutions fail.                             
        If Serge has overestimated the teacher’s dislike of him, the elegant solution will work.
      And according to REBT and Figure 6.1, a change in the core irrational beliefs will result
      in changing his perceptions, attributions, and automatic thoughts if they are in fact
      incorrect. It can also result in improved problem-solving skills.
        REBT does not predict that the inelegant cognitive interventions will not work.
      Rather, Ellis believed that they are not philosophical; they do not provide coping strate-
      gies across a wide range of stimuli. They could be incorrect and fail to acknowledge
      clients’ negative reality, and thereby fail to provide clients with a coping strategy to
      their negative reality. REBT acknowledges that all clients might not achieve the philo-
      sophical solution, and advocates that the inelegant interventions be used in such cases
      (DiGiuseppe et al., 2014; Ellis, 1977, 1994, 2003b).           
      The Three Insights                                             
      During psychotherapy, psychotherapists continually work at helping clients develop
      three insights that will improve their adjustment (DiGiuseppe et al., 2014; Dryden
      et al., 2010; Ellis & Dryden, 1987).                           
         Insight 1. Past or present activating events do not cause one’s disturbance. It is the
           beliefs one has about them that lead to disturbance.      
         Insight 2. Regardless of how one learned to think what one thinks, and regardless
           of how compelling these beliefs have been, one continues to believe in them
           now because of one’s own reindoctrination, rehearsal, or acceptance of these
           beliefs.                                                  
         Insight 3. Insight alone is usually not sufficient to change one’s over-rehearsed irra-
           tionalthinking.Peopleusuallychangeirrationaldysfunctionalthinkingthrough
           repeated, effortful attempts to challenge these beliefs, construct new ones, and
           rehearse these new rational beliefs.                      
                                                                     
      The 13 Steps of REBT                                           
                                                                     
      Dryden, DiGiuseppe, and Neenan (2010) identified 13 steps that normally occur in a
      REBT psychotherapy session. They recommended that psychotherapists new to the sys-
      tem learn and follow these steps to avoid mistakes and ensure they perform all the crucial
      aspects of the model. Some trainees keep a checklist to remind them of the steps and to
                                                                     
      guide them through a session. The following list presents the 13 steps in a session note
      format that can be copied from this book and used to record the specific information
      revealed at each step. All the steps apply to the treatment of children and adolescents,
      even if the techniques used to accomplish the steps may differ across age groups.

=== Page 193 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 179
                                                                     
          The 13 Steps of Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy in Session Note Format,
          REBT Session Note, and Guide                               
                                                                     
            Step 1: Ask client for the problem.                      
            Step 2: Define and agree on the goals of therapy.        
            Step 3: Assess the emotional and behavioral “C.”         
            Step 4: Assess the “A.”                                  
                                                                     
            Step 5: Assess the existence of any secondary emotional problems.
            Step 6: Teach the B–C connection.                        
            Step 7: Assess the irrational beliefs.                   
            Step 8: Connect the irrational beliefs to the disturbed emotions, and connect the
               rational beliefs to the nondisturbed emotion.         
            Step 9: Dispute irrational beliefs: Circle all that you have done: logical, empirical,
               heuristic, design new rational alternative beliefs, didactic, Socratic, metaphori-
                                                                     
               cal, and humorous.                                    
            Step 10: Prepare your clients to deepen their conviction in the rational belief.
            Step 11: Encourage your client to put new learning into practice with homework.
            Step 12: Check homework assignments.                     
            Step 13: Facilitate the working through process.         
                                                                     
            The first step is to ask clients what problems they want to discuss in the session. Some-
          times, clients present problems that are unrelated to topics discussed in previous sessions,
          but mostly they present examples of the primary referral problem. The second step is to
                                                                     
          agree on the goal of the session. Clients may present entirely new issues unrelated to the
          issues discussed in previous sessions; psychotherapists might wish to continue with ongo-
          ing topics before switching to a new topic. As a result, they might not agree on what to
          cover in the session and, before continuing, agreement is needed. Also, clients often see
          the goal as changing the A and psychotherapists see it as changing the C. Because REBT
          recommends working on emotional problems first, the agreement on the goals aspect of
                                                                     
          the therapeutic alliance may break down. A consensus on what problem to tackle is cru-
          cial for the session to continue. Steps 3, 4, and 5 involve assessing the C, assessing the
          A, and assessing for secondary emotional disturbance, respectively. At Step 6, the psy-
          chotherapist teaches the client the B–C connection (see Vernon, 1998a, 1998b, 1998c,
          2007 for techniques). Step 7 involves assessing a client’s irrational beliefs. Remember
          that irrational beliefs are tacit, unconscious, schematic cognitions. They are not experi-
          enced in the stream of consciousness, although they are available to our consciousness.
                                                                     
          Most psychotherapists ask clients, “What were you thinking when you got upset?” Such
          questions are likely to elicit automatic thoughts, not irrational beliefs. DiGiuseppe et al.
          (2014) suggest that there are two primary strategies to assess irrational beliefs. The first
          is “inference chaining.” Automatic thoughts are inferences that people draw from the

=== Page 194 (1 cols) ===
180   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      perceptions they make, and which they are prepared to make by the core schema or
      irrational beliefs they hold. Follow the logic of the inferences and one can uncover
      the core irrational belief. Inference chaining involves a series of follow-up questions
      to the automatic thoughts. These questions ask clients to hypothesize that their auto-
      matic thought was true. If it were true, what would happen next, or what would it mean
      to them? Clients usually respond with other automatic thoughts. The psychotherapist
      continues with the same type of question until an irrational belief, a “must,” an awfuliz-
      ing statement, an “I can’t stand it,” or a global evaluation is uncovered. Inference chains
      will keep clients emotionally aroused, because you are getting closer to their real core
      issue. Despite the increase in emotional arousal, clients feel relieved to uncover their
      core beliefs; and this usually provides a bonding experience between the psychotherapist
      and client.                                                    
        The second primary strategy is based on the awareness that not all clients are capable
      of putting their irrational beliefs into language because as tacit, schematic cognitions
      they might not be stored in verbal memory. REBT (DiGiuseppe et al., 2014) suggested
      thatallpsychotherapistsdevelophypothesesabouttheirclients’irrationalbeliefs.Rather
      than let clients struggle to try and become aware of their core irrational beliefs, psy-
      chotherapists can offer hypotheses to clients. To do this effectively, psychotherapists
      should (a) be sure to use suppositional language, (b) ask the client for feedback on the
      correctness of the hypotheses, (c) be prepared to be wrong, (d) revise the hypotheses
      based on the responses of the client.                          
        Thenextstepsinthesequencelinktheclients’irrationalbeliefswiththeclients’emo-
      tional disturbance (Step 8). This step requires some care because children often have
      difficulty distinguishing between thoughts and feelings (Gotterbarn, 1990). Next, the
      psychotherapists begin disputing the irrational beliefs (Step 9). Challenging irrational
      beliefs is the most difficult task in REBT. A detailed explanation of the disputing process
      was created by dissecting many hours of Ellis’s videotapes doing therapy (DiGiuseppe
      et al., 2014). One can dispute an irrational belief by challenging its logic, by testing its
      empirical accuracy, and by evaluating the functionality of the consequences that follow
      from holding it. Also, one needs to propose an alternative rational idea, and challenge it
      with the same arguments to assess whether it fares any better. In addition to adjusting the
      type of argument, REBT suggests that psychotherapists vary the rhetorical style of their
      disputing (DiGiuseppe et al., 2014). One can use didactic (direct teaching) strategies,
      Socratic strategies, metaphors, or humor. Kopec, Beal, and DiGiuseppe (1994) have cre-
      ated a grid with each cell representing a type of argument and a type of rhetorical style.
      They recommend that psychotherapists generate the disputing statements for each cell
      in the grid before each therapy session. Their data suggest that this activity increases
      trainees’ self-efficacy in disputing. To better learn disputing techniques, the reader can
      try this activity for several weeks across several clients. Another important component

=== Page 195 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 181
                                                                     
          ofdisputingistheuseofimagery.Psychotherapistsandclientscanconstructscenesofthe
          client approaching the activating event and rehearsing the new rational coping state-
                                                                     
          ment, experiencing adaptive emotions, and behaving appropriately.
            Step 10 in the model involves deepening clients’ conviction in their rational beliefs.
          This is accomplished through continued disputing, and also by defining how they would
          behave differently if they actually held the new rational belief (Step 11), and agreeing
          to actual homework between sessions to achieve their goals (Step 12). Although REBT
          uses the term homework with adults, it is best to use a term like practice or rehearsal
          for school-age clients, because homework is something they naturally resist. Rehearsal
                                                                     
          assignments could include having them complete REBT homework sheets that guide
          clients through disputing an irrational belief, the rehearsing of imagery, or engaging in
          a behavioral activity. Step 13, the final, is to review other examples of activating events
          the client has been upset about to promote generalization. 
                                                                     
          Individual Psychotherapy with Children and Adolescents     
                                                                     
          Early in his career, Ellis adapted REBT to children (Ellis, Wolfe, & Moseley, 1966) in the
          Living School, an educational program within the Institute. To many people’s surprise,
          REBT can be used with children from as early as age 5, with a variety of emotional
          problems. Techniques differ for children between the ages of 5 and 11, and adoles-
          cents 12 to 18 years old. The most common objection to using such a cognitively ori-
          ented therapy with children and adolescents is that children are not cognitively mature
          enough to engage in this type of discourse. Developmental considerations are important.
                                                                     
          Several authors have independently suggested (Bernard & Joyce, 1993; DiGiuseppe &
          Bernard, 2006; Grave & Blissett, 2004; Vernon, 1998a) that children who have reached
          Piaget’s (1963) concrete operations stage can benefit from disputing. Research (Casey &
          Berman, 1985) has confirmed that cognitive restructuring interventions are more effi-
          cacious for children more than 8 years old than under age 8, the approximate age when
          children enter this stage. Children who have not yet reached the concrete operations
                                                                     
          phase(thoselessthan8yearsold)willhavedifficultywiththelogicofdisputingandwith
          thinking about their thinking. For these children, psychotherapists are recommended to
          use treatments that focus on concrete skills, such as problem-solving (Nezu, Maguth
          Nezu, & D’Zurilla, 2013) and rehearsing rational coping statements (Meichenbaum,
          1993).                                                     
            Children are referred because they are disturbing, not because they are disturbed. As
          a result, most children attend therapy against their will. As a result, children often have
                                                                     
          not yet decided that they want to change. Therefore, discussing the goals and tasks of
          therapy is more critical to the establishment of a therapeutic alliance with children than
          with adults. It is important to consider the concepts of stages of change and processes of
          changeoutlinedbyNorcrossetal.(2011).Theyproposethatpeoplepassthroughaseries

=== Page 196 (1 cols) ===
182   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      of stages of attitudes about change. These include the precontemplative stage, where
      individuals do not want to change; the contemplative stage, where they are thinking
      they might change; the action stage, where people try to change; and the maintenance
      stage, where people consolidate gains and attempt to keep the new behaviors. The stages
      of change model proposed that the type of therapy needs to match clients’ stage of
      change. REBT is an action-oriented therapy, designed for people in the action stage
      of change. Because most children and adolescents arrive in the precontemplative stage,
      the psychotherapists must establish the agreement on the goals and tasks of therapy to
      build the therapeutic alliance, before using such an active approach.
        REBT (DiGiuseppe & Bernard, 2006; DiGiuseppe & Jilton, 1996) recognizing the
      importance of establishing the therapeutic alliance in children and adolescents or adults
      who arrive in therapy in the precontemplative stage, especially agreement on the goals
      and tasks of therapy. Identifying and challenging one’s irrational beliefs only makes sense
      if one holds some prerequisite beliefs. The elements of this motivational syllogism are as
      follows: (1) my present emotion is dysfunctional; (2) there is an alternative acceptable
      emotional script for this type of activating event; (3) it is better for me to give up the
      dysfunction emotion and work toward feeling the alternative one; (4) my beliefs cause
      my emotions; therefore, (5) I will work at changing my beliefs to change my emotions.
      Establishing all these beliefs will help motivate a child or adolescent to engage in the
      REBT process. This model facilitates agreement on the goals of therapy and moving
      clients to the action stage of change. Psychotherapists need to assess each child’s and
      adolescent’s stage of change and agreement on the goals of therapy before proceeding
      with any REBT interventions. If the child or adolescent has not reached the action stage
      and does not desire to change, techniques outlined by DiGiuseppe and Jilton (1996), or
      other similar techniques like motivational interviewing (Miller & Rollnick, 2002) could
      be used to accomplish this task.                               
        The models proposed by DiGiuseppe and Jilton (1996) involve asking clients to assess
      the consequences of their emotional and behavioral responses in a Socratic fashion.
      This helps them identify the negative consequences for their emotional disturbance and
      behavior. Next, the psychotherapists present alternative emotional reactions that are
      culturally acceptable to each client. Because people learn emotional scripts from their
      families, and learn that some emotional scripts are acceptable to their cultural group, it
      is possible that disturbed children or adolescents have not changed because they can-
      not conceptualize an acceptable emotional script to experience in place of the disturbed
      emotion. Psychotherapists need to explore with the client alternative emotional reac-
      tions that are culturally acceptable. Next, psychotherapists need to help clients make
      the connection that the alternative script is more advantageous to the client.

=== Page 197 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 183
                                                                     
          Individual Psychotherapy with Children                     
                                                                     
          A typical therapy session with a preadolescent child might involve some variations on
          the 13-step model and could be organized as follows:       
                                                                     
            1. Because children do not always remember what has happened during the week,
              the session may start by meeting with the parents and child to talk about the
              progress of the past week.                             
                                                                     
            2. Together, the psychotherapist and child plan the session agenda.
            3. The psychotherapist reviews the homework assignment from the past week, sets
              session goals, discusses activities to be used to reach session goals, and discusses
              the consequences of modifying disturbed behaviors and emotions.
            4. The client is helped to generate alternate emotional scripts that include new
              ways to feel and act.                                  
            5. Next the psychotherapist will teach the B–C and explore the beliefs that lead to
                                                                     
              the disturbed emotion.                                 
            6. The client and psychotherapist challenge the irrational beliefs and explore ratio-
              nal alternative beliefs.                               
            7. The client and psychotherapist agree on homework assignment for the coming
              week and review the homework assignment with the parents (DiGiuseppe, 1989,
              1994).                                                 
                                                                     
            Psychotherapists explain and demonstrate how thoughts can cause feelings, and that
                                                                     
          certain thoughts (irrational beliefs) produce disturbed emotions, whereas other thoughts
          (rational beliefs) lead to nondisturbed emotions. Some children could have difficulty
          distinguishing between disturbed and nondisturbed emotions, and therefore, the psy-
          chotherapist might need to teach them to identify and label various emotions and then
          to be able to distinguish between those that are helpful and those that are hurtful. Fur-
          ther, the psychotherapist teaches that thoughts can be changed to produce nondisturbed
          feelings. The psychotherapist helps the child practice distinguishing between disturbed
                                                                     
          and nondisturbed cognitions and emotions. Additionally, the child practices disputing
          irrational beliefs and replacing them with more rational thoughts. Specific techniques
          used to help the client practice these skills include modeling, role-playing, and imagery,
          as well as homework involving the parents.                 
            REBT with preadolescent children is concrete and usually involves activities and
          hands-on materials that teach the concepts. Many of these activities are presented in
                                                                     
          Bernard and Joyce (1993) and Vernon (1998a, 1998b, 1998c). With younger children,
          not yet capable of disputing, the psychotherapist teaches them to use rational self-talk

=== Page 198 (1 cols) ===
184   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      to deal with the problem situation whenever it arises. The child practices rational cop-
      ing statements (DiGiuseppe, 1977) based on Meichenbaum’s (1993) self-instructional
      guidelines (see Ellis, & Wilde, 2002, for case examples).      
        The REBT approach developed adapted tools for teaching children its principles,
      based on play and metaphors. The therapeutic or rational stories for children (Waters,
      1980), and the RETMAN character and its comics (Merriefield and Merriefield, 1979)
      were the first developed. The RETMAN character was recently developed into rational
      stories (David, 2010), cartoons (David, 2013), and a robotic system (David & David,
      2013; see at www.retman.ro). The book of therapeutic stories “Retmagic and the won-
      derful adventures of RETMAN” presents the RETMAN character having his own story
      (e.g., he is coming from a planet called Rationalia, in the happiness galaxy) and adven-
      tures for teaching earth inhabitants the secrets of the good mind. Each of the irrational
      processes is represented by a character. The cartoons RETMAN and Retmagic are pre-
      senting the adventures of the character in five episodes, first dedicated to the story of
      RETMAN and the other four to managing a dysfunctional emotion (depression, anxi-
      ety, anger, and guilt). The RETMAN robotic system (roboRETMAN) incorporates the
      mechatronic device based on an action figure of the RETMAN character, and is offer-
      ing children with rational statements in the form of the “psychological pills” (i.e., “It
      is bad but not catastrophic to feel this way”; David & David, 2013). The system is cur-
      rently developed to incorporate online gaming components based on the RETMAN’s
      adventures.                                                    
      Individual Psychotherapy with Adolescents                      
      Developmentally, adolescents are concerned with forming their identities. They can
      often be oppositional and refuse to heed the advice of people from a different generation.
      They are somewhat egocentric and believe that their problems are unique to themselves
      or their generation. They are also often sent to therapy against their will, and arrive in
      the precontemplative stage of change. With adolescents, it is particularly important to
      ensure that the psychotherapist has agreement on the goals and tasks of therapy, and to
      explain to the clients how the tasks will improve their current situation. Therefore, we
      recommend psychotherapists go through the steps of the motivational syllogism before
      the discussion of each new problem and before the use of any intervention.
        Compared to working with children, the psychotherapist can focus more on provid-
      ing insight, and can expect to engage in both elegant and inelegant disputing. It is
      important, though, not to assume that the adolescent will necessarily follow a logical
                                                                     
      argument and therefore can engage in disputing irrational beliefs. Although adoles-
      cents have achieved greater cognitive development, some research suggests that REBT
      is more effective with preadolescent children. Adolescents are developmentally mature
      enough that the psychotherapist can use all the strategies and cognitions that have been

=== Page 199 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 185
                                                                     
          proposed with adults. However, adolescents know it all. Therefore, they appear to do
          better with Socratic disputing than with didactic interventions. Clinical experience
                                                                     
          suggests they respond best to functional disputes of their irrational beliefs rather than
          logical ones. Adolescents, as a whole, are idealistic. They often believe that what is
          good or righteous must be. Empirical disputes aimed at demonstrating that reality is not
          as it should be also seem not as helpful. Again, functional disputes appear to work best.
          Time will eventually teach adolescents to distinguish between the real and ideal world.
          Also, adolescents overvalue peer acceptance. It is helpful to have an adolescent recall
          the rational beliefs that have been endorsed by a peer, or to search the lyrics of popu-
                                                                     
          lar songs for rational messages. These techniques increase the likelihood the idea will
          be adopted.                                                
                                                                     
          Group Procedures with Children and Adolescents             
          Ellis long advocated Rational Emotive Behavior Group Therapy (REBGT). The group
          process, or focusing on how group members relate to each other, is not the primary focus
                                                                     
          of REBGT. However, conflicts between members that develop are important topics for
          discussion because they often reflect the child’s ability to relate to peers, which is often a
          reason for referral. Group therapy is usually recommended for financial reasons. Admin-
          istrators like psychotherapists to provide group therapy because more clients are treated
          forthesamehourofpsychotherapisttime.Itisimportantthatpsychotherapistsusegroup
          therapy for clinical rather than economic reasons. REBGT appears most helpful for peo-
          ple with social difficulties. The group forces them to confront their social fears and the
                                                                     
          exposure to others helps build social skills. It is also helpful to place clients in groups after
          a brief period of individual therapy. The group experiences help them overlearn the skills
          ofcontrollingtheiremotions,aftertheyhavegottenagoodstartfromindividualtherapy.
          Clinical experience suggests that children with disruptive behavior problems do poorly
          in groups. They are primarily reinforced for their disruptive behavior by peer attention
          that the psychotherapist cannot control. Therefore, the group can become uncontrol-
          lable. Younger children with disruptive behavior problems ages 7 years and below can
                                                                     
          be treated in groups if the psychotherapist has a reinforcement system for cooperation
          and has access to rewards that are of interest to that age level.
            Two formats can be used in REBGT. With the open-ended format, group members
          take turns presenting a problem on which they want to receive help. Psychotherapists
          and group members help that client solve the problem using REBT principles. As the
          group continues, clients learn from the problems they present, from the advice and com-
                                                                     
          ments of the psychotherapist and the other group members, and from observing how the
          other group members are helped. With this format, psychotherapists need to be aware
          of the clock to ensure that one client does not take too much time in any session, and
          that all clients get equal opportunity to present their problems. Clients tend to offer

=== Page 200 (1 cols) ===
186   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      more practical solutions than emotional solutions in the group. A discussion of philo-
      sophical solutions is unlikely to occur unless psychotherapists steer the discussions in
      that direction.                                                
        Asecondformatisthehomogeneousgroup.Hereallthegroupmembershaveasimilar
      problem. Psychotherapists can present a series of discussions and exercises related to the
      problem. In each session, the psychotherapist leads the members in a discussion and/or
      exercises, and makes sure that all members participate and learn to apply the new skills
      to their individualized problem.                               
        With adults, REBGT has been practiced with members with homogeneous and het-
      erogeneous problems. However, with children it appears best to group the members by
      the presenting problem and by the child’s age. Mixing children with too many different
      problems may make it difficult for them to focus on issues that do not relate to them.
      REBGT employs a psychoeducational model. Having children who differ in age by more
      than 3 years also presents too great a range of developmental skills for the psychother-
      apist to address all the members’ issues and to keep the attention of all the members.
      Much of the material that has been developed for classroom applications of REBT can
      and is used by psychotherapists in REBGT.                      
      Classroom and Educational Applications                         
      From its inception, Ellis considered REBT to be a psychoeducational method that could
      be taught to people in workshops, classrooms, and groups (Bernard & DiGiuseppe,
      1990). From 1971 to 1975, the Institute for Advanced Study in Rational Psychotherapy
      ran an elementary school in the building with a curriculum that taught rational thinking
      as a preventive mental health program along with the standard academic subjects.
      During this time, the institute staff developed exercises and classroom activities to
      teach various thinking skills. These activities resulted in an initially syllabus (Knaus,
      1974), which included well-specified activities that teachers, guidance counselors, or
      psychotherapists could use to educate children in the ABCs. These original materials
      served as models for further generations of such manuals including the more detailed
      classroom/group manuals by Vernon (1998a, 1998b, 1998c). These syllabi focus on
      specific emotional problems children have and lessons that teach the following skills:
      (a) developing critical thinking skills; (b) distinguishing between thoughts and feelings;
      (c) distinguishing between opinions, facts, and hypotheses; (d) linking thoughts and
      feelings, the B–C connection; (e) identifying ideas that lead to emotional upset; (f) dis-
      tinguishing between rational and irrational beliefs; (g) challenging irrational beliefs;
                                                                     
      and (h) specific modules on self-worth versus self-esteem, low frustration tolerance,
      demandingness, and catastrophizing (Vernon, 2007). Although these materials were
      designed for educational purposes, they make excellent activities to use in groups.
        The most comprehensive educational REBT program is Bernard’s You Can Do It.
      This multimedia presentation includes an excellent, professionally produced video that

=== Page 201 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 187
                                                                     
          focuses on the cognitive skills and attitudes necessary to succeed academically, and
          the irrational beliefs that block achievement. In addition to these videos, the You Can
                                                                     
          Do It series includes student workbooks, teachers, manuals to guide discussions, and
          accompanying visual overheads. All the materials are designed with appealing cartoon
          characters.                                                
            Bernard (1990) also developed an REBT stress management program group for teach-
          ers. The program includes a teachers’ irrational belief scale that can be used as a pretest
          to identify each teacher’s irrational beliefs. The scale has been shown to discriminate
          between teachers who are on disability because of emotional stress and well-functioning
                                                                     
          teachers. His REBT stress management syllabus helps the participants learn the ABCs
          and identify the beliefs that led to their job stress. It also teaches strategies to dispute
          irrational beliefs, and how to develop rational alternative beliefs. Bora, Vernon, and Trip
          (2013) tested the effectiveness of a REBT program for reducing teachers’ irrationality,
          dysfunctional emotions, and behaviors. Results showed a decrease in measures of these
          constructs, and the results were maintained at 4-month follow-up.
            Bernard and DiGiuseppe (1993) adapted REBT to consultation activities in the
                                                                     
          school. Most models of psychological consultation assume that the consultant may
          have some expert knowledge that the consultee can use. By building a collaborative
          relationship and problem-solving set, the consultant is able to suggest information or
          strategies that the consultee is free to accept or reject. Most models of organizational,
          educational, behavioral, and instructional consultation assume that the consultee
          only needs new information. Like mental health consultation, REBT theory suggests
          that teachers, parents, principals, and administrators can be blocked from seeing or
          implementing solutions to problems by their own emotional disturbance. Bernard
                                                                     
          and DiGiuseppe (1993) suggested that consultants evaluate the consultees’ emotional
          responses to the problems and their thinking. Often consultees become stuck because
          they rigidly adhere to ideas about how things must be done and respond emotionally to
          problems instead of seeking solutions. The REBT-oriented consultant will look for such
          reactions in consultees and Socratically explore the consultees’ emotional reactions
          and rigid thinking. The first task of the consultant is to help consultees become aware
          of their emotional reactions and have them agree to discuss their feelings and thinking.
                                                                     
          Bernard and DiGiuseppe (1993) applied this model to working with teachers, parents,
          and administrators around instructional and organizational issues.
                                                                     
          Parental and Family Involvement in Therapy                 
                                                                     
          Parents become the focus in REBT sessions treating children in several ways (see
          Bernard, 1995, 2006; DiGiuseppe & Kelter, 2006; Doyle & Terjesen, 2006; Joyce,
          2006). First, they can be the primary targets of intervention to overcome their own
          emotional disturbance that interferes with their parenting. Research has shown that
          parents’ emotional disturbance is the primary reason adults fail to engage in correct

=== Page 202 (1 cols) ===
188   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      parenting practices (Dix, 1991) and fail to benefit from behavioral parent training
      programs (Dadds & McHugh, 1992). Although behavioral parent training appears to
      be the most successful intervention with children with externalized disorders (Kazdin
      & Weisz, 2010), parents are unlikely to display good parent skills if their emotional
      disturbance about their child’s behavior interferes (David, David, & DiGiuseppe,
      2014). DiGiuseppe (1988; DiGiuseppe & Kelter, 2006) proposed a sequential family
      therapy model for the treatment of externalized disordered children who are unwilling
      to participate in individual therapy (see list below). It focuses on the following steps:
          1. A thorough assessment of the child’s pathology, a behavioral analysis of the
            eliciting stimuli and reinforcers, consequences, and family functioning.
          2. Forming a therapeutic alliance with the parents.        
          3. Choosing a target behavior and consequences collaboratively with the parents.
          4. Assessing parents’ ability to carry out the interventions, including their emo-
            tional reactions and irrational beliefs.                 
          5. Changing parents’ irrational beliefs and emotions that would interfere with per-
            forming the new parenting strategies.                    
          6. Have parents predict what resistance they expect to occur to their new parent-
            ing strategies from the identified patient or other family members, and generate
            solutions to confront these attempts at resistance.      
          7. Assess the parents’ ability to follow the strategies they choose to handle the
            resistance, again focusing on their emotions and irrational beliefs.
          8. Intervening with parents again at changing the irrational beliefs and schemata
            that would prevent them from handling the resistance.    
          9. Continuing to assess the children’s progress and the parents’ compliance with
            the behavioral skills, and modify behavior treatment plan as needed.
         10. Start individual psychotherapy with the child to internalize gains made by the
            behavioral intervention.                                 
      Sequence of Family Therapy for Treatment of Externalized Disorders
                                                                     
         Stage 1: Assessment. Assess (a) What is the nature of psychopathology? (b) What
           is the developmental level of functioning, and the discriminative stimulus that
           elicit the problems and its reinforcers? (c) What is the structure of the fam-
           ily? (d) What are the roles of individual family members? (e) Who will resist?
           (f) What are the emotions, skills, and cognitions of each member?
                                                                     
         Stage 2: Engaging parents in the therapeutic alliance. If one parent is resistant to change,
           use motivational interviewing or problem-solving with the motivated parent to
           engage the resistant parent.                              
         Stage 3: Behavioral intervention. Choose a target behavior and reinforcers.

=== Page 203 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 189
                                                                     
            Stage 4: Assessing parents’ ability to carry out agreed intervention. Assess the parents’
               emotions and cognitions that may stop them from carrying out the agreed-on
                                                                     
               intervention. Possible parental interfering emotions: guilt, anger, anxiety, dis-
               comfort. Parents’ irrational beliefs: demandingness, catastrophizing, frustration
               intolerance, self-downing, projected frustration intolerance, condemnation of
               the child.                                            
            Stage 5: Therapy on the parents. Cognitive restructuring of the parents’ irrational
               beliefs. Use all the techniques that one would in adult REBT to focus on the
               emotions and cognitions identified in the previous stage.
                                                                     
            Stage 6: Predict resistance. What do the parents believe the child or others will do to
               sabotage their efforts? Problem-solve how they can respond to those attempts at
               sabotage. This will help them to do it on their own after termination.
            Stage 7: Assessment of the parents’ ability to follow intervention. Imagine themselves
               following through. What emotions and beliefs will they have about this new
               action? What do they believe their emotional reactions will be to these inter-
               ventions? Assess emotions and cognitions that will get in their way of following
                                                                     
               through on the intervention chosen to counteract the sabotage.
            Stage 8: Intervention with parents. Dispute the irrational beliefs that they will experi-
               ence and that could encourage them to give into the resistance.
            Stage 9: How will the child respond to the new action? (a) Repeat assessment,
               (b) redesign interventions through collaborative problem-solving, (c) continue
               to assess parents’ ability to carry out the new interventions, (d) continue
                                                                     
               to use cognitive restructuring to help them follow through on the planned
               interventions.                                        
            Stage 10: Individual therapy for the child or adolescent. At the beginning of each session,
               assess the progress the child and parents have made. If parents have followed
               their interventions, remain at this stage. If they have not, return to Stage 8. Use
               themotivationalsyllogismtohelpthechildinternalizethedesirabilityofchange
               and cooperation with the psychotherapists. Use all REBT and CBT methods to
                                                                     
               reducetheundesirabletargetbehaviorsandsupportthedesiredpositivechanges.
                                                                     
           In DiGiuseppe’s (1988; DiGiuseppe & Kelter, 2006) model, changing the parents’
          irrational cognitions and emotional disturbance is done to get the parents to adopt more
          effective parenting skills, which is necessary to accomplish the primary goal of changing
          the child’s symptomatic behavior. However, the parents’ disturbance is a crucial target
                                                                     
          of the interventions.                                      
           Huber and Baruth (1989) integrated REBT with family systems therapy. They
          maintain that family systems theories require some individual psychological variables
          to explain how the family members maintain dysfunctional homeostasis. Huber and

=== Page 204 (1 cols) ===
190   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Baruth (1989) believe that irrational beliefs and their resulting emotional arousal lead
      to avoidance of change and thereby maintain the homeostasis. This model hypothesizes
      that family members share common irrational beliefs, such as rigid rules about the roles
      family members must play, beliefs that certain topics must not be discussed, beliefs that
      certain or all family members must behave in certain ways, or rules about how family
      members must react to the outside world. Many family systems psychotherapists present
      similar cognitive constructs, which they call family myths. Huber and Baruth (1989)
      believe that acknowledging the role of shared family cognitions and integrating systems
      therapy with cognitive interventions such as REBT can provide psychotherapists with
      a set of skills to accomplish the cognitive elements in family disturbance. Huber and
      Baruth(1989)seefamiliesasaunitandworkatidentifyingthefamilystructure,assessing
      the irrational family beliefs or myths that maintain the dysfunctional family structure.
      They then help all family members challenge and replace the irrational family myths,
      and conceptualize new ways of behavior based on alternative rational family beliefs.
        Parents can play an essential role in treatment even when the focus of psychotherapy
      is changing the child. Currently, group parenting programs are recommended as treat-
      ment of choice for child conduct disorders (see NICE guidelines) and their efficacy is
      well documented as stand-alone treatment for child psychopathology (Lundahl, Risser,
      & Lovejoy, 2006). The assumption is that parents can function as agents of change for
      promoting their child’s mental health and reducing psychopathology by learning how to
      use efficient and consistent parenting practices. Several REBT parenting program cur-
      ricula have appeared to-date (Clark, 1996; Gavita, 2011; Joyce, 1995) for promoting
      child mental health, with the Rational Positive Parenting program receiving recently
      most empirical support (Gavita, DiGiuseppe, & David, 2013). The Rational Positive
      Parenting (RPP) program uses a group format for teaching parents effective strategies
      for dealing with child disruptive behaviors (using praise, rewards, point charts, family
      rules, negative consequences, time-out), while building own/child unconditional accep-
      tance and frustration tolerance. The standard RPP program has 10 sessions of 90 minutes
      and its first two sessions are dedicated toward building parent emotion-regulation skills
      through rational thinking, and focusing on improving parenting practices only after-
      ward. Variations of the program have been developed and tested (David, 2014; Gavita &
      C˘ alin, 2013; Gavita, David, Bujoreanu, Tiba, & Ionu¸ tiu, 2012) in terms of standard and
      short format, group format, or self-help bibliotherapy (including “psychological pills” for
      parents; Gavita et al., 2013) or online format (including attention bias modification pro-
      cedures; David, in press), and were adapted for addressing externalizing or internalizing
      symptoms in children and adolescents.                          
        In individual psychotherapy of the child, parents are often unaware of the issues dis-
      cussed by the psychotherapist and child. Parents often want to be involved in their
      children’s psychotherapy because of their natural concern for their children’s well-being.

=== Page 205 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 191
                                                                     
          If the child agrees, if the problem does not necessarily involve a family matter the child
          would feel inhibited to discuss in front of the parents, and if the parents are willing,
                                                                     
          parents can play a helpful role in the child’s individual psychotherapy. DiGiuseppe and
          Bernard (2006) recommended four ways that parents can become involved to improve
          the effectiveness of individual psychotherapy. First, children can be given the homework
          assignment of describing the important points of a session to their parents, such as the
          B–C connection or disputes to irrational beliefs or the rational coping statements they
          will use when they become upset. This technique provides children with opportunities
          to rehearse the principle psychotherapists want to teach, and allows the parents to feel
                                                                     
          involved with their children’s treatment.                  
            Second, parents can join the psychotherapy session. When problematic activating
          events or emotional upsets occur between sessions, parents usually attempt to help their
          children and provide advice. Sometimes parents’ comments are inconsistent with the
          psychotherapists’ goals, or they reinforce their children’s irrational thinking or are just
          not helpful. If parents have been present during the sessions, they can remind their
                                                                     
          children of the rational coping statements that were provided in the session or they can
          use the principles of REBT that they learned in session to guide their responses to their
          children when the child experiences problems. Again, parents who participate in this
          way feel good about being part of the solution and report learning how to talk to their
          children in ways that are helpful to their children. Some parents even report that it has
          helped them with their own emotional problems.             
            Third, parents can provide information that children often forget. Weekly psy-
                                                                     
          chotherapy sessions were designed for adults. Children often fail to remember
          significant events that happen between sessions, thus denying psychotherapists impor-
          tant information on problems children have had between sessions. When parents are
          present, they often remind the children of successful coping experiences that they have
          had that psychotherapists can reinforce. The parents also report important activating
          events that children do not handle well that could be the focus of the session.
            Fourth, psychotherapists can design homework assignments that include the parents.
                                                                     
          For example, children with social anxieties who withdraw when they are teased need
          to learn disputes to their fear-provoking beliefs and to learn new rational coping state-
          ments to verbal attacks by peers. Often psychotherapists can role-play the verbal attacks
          in the session and the children learn to rehearse their disputes and coping statements.
          Psychotherapists can enlist the parents to role-play their children’s tormentors between
          sessions. The parent can call out a barb to the child and the child will rehearse the
                                                                     
          new cognitions as well as new social skills. Here the parents prompt rehearsal of a new
          response and can coach the child because of what they have learned in the session.
          Whenever and however possible, it is thus recommended to involve parents in the
          child’s treatment.

=== Page 206 (1 cols) ===
192   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      The Efficacy of REBT                                           
      The American Psychological Association (2012) passed a resolution affirming that the
      effectiveness of psychotherapy is widely accepted to be significant and large; and that the
      differences in outcome across different forms of psychotherapy are not as “pronounced”
      as has been expected. Research in psychotherapy has evolved considerably in the past
      four decades. Presently, few researchers are interested in the horse race of determin-
      ing which psychotherapy is the most efficacious (see Campbell, Norcross, Vasquez, &
      Kaslow, 2013). This resolution reported on the effectiveness and professional accepted
      forms of psychotherapy. Thus it is still important to document the effectiveness and
      efficacy of each type of psychotherapy.                        
        Before committing oneself to practicing a form of psychotherapy, a professional had
      better review the outcome literature to evaluate its efficacy. This should be true of REBT
      because Ellis has placed such a value on the scientific method.
        Smith and Glass’s (1977) original meta-analytic review of psychotherapy outcome
      studies concluded that RET (as it was called then) was the second most effective
      psychotherapy, after systematic desensitization. Successive meta-analytic reviews failed
      to distinguish between narrowly defined types of therapies and categorized therapies
      into broader classes of cognitive-behavioral, behavioral, and psychodynamic. REBT
      studies have been categorized with CBT. Despite its early showing by Smith and Glass
      (1977), REBT has maintained a reputation of having insufficient empirical support.
      This view probably evolved because Ellis’s career has focused on theory and practice
      rather than research.                                          
        REBT outcome research includes 16 previous reviews (DiGiuseppe, Miller, &
      Trexler, 1977; Engels, Garnefski, & Diekstra, 1993; Esposito, 2009; Ford, 2009; Gossette
      & O’Brien, 1992, 1993; Haaga & Davison, 1989; Hajzler & Bernard, 1990; Jorm, 1989;
      Lyons & Woods, 1991; Mahoney, 1974; McGovern & Silverman, 1984; Oei, Hansen, &
      Miller, 1993; Polder, 1986; Silverman, McCarthy, & McGovern, 1992; Zettle & Hayes,
      1980). Most of these are narrative reviews; five are meta-analyses (i.e., Engels et al.,
      1993; Esposito, 2009; Ford, 2009; Lyons & Woods, 1991; Polder, 1986). Most have
      included studies of adults and children, others have focused only on adults (Gossette
      & O’Brien, 1992; Zettle & Hayes, 1980), and two have focused only on research with
      children and adolescents (Gossette & O’Brien, 1993; Hajzler & Bernard, 1990). Most
      reviewers have included published reviewed articles and unpublished dissertations.
      Others have included a majority of unpublished dissertations in their review (Gossette
      & O’Brien, 1992, 1993). Most have been favorable, although some others have been
      critical. Table 6.4 lists the reviews alphabetically by author, the year published, the range
      of years of the studies included, the populations reviewed, and their general conclusions.
        Each review employed a different selection criterion. More than 300 studies are
      mentioned in these 16 reviews. However, the reviews rarely included the same studies.

=== Page 207 (1 cols) ===
T                                                          
          a b l e 6 .                                                
          4                                                          
          R                                                          
          e                                                          
          v                                                          
          i                                                          
          e                                                          
          w                                                          
          s                                                          
          o                                                          
          f                                                          
          t                                                          
          h                                                          
          e                                                          
          R                                                          
          E                                                          
          B                                                          
          T                                                          
          O                                                          
          u                                                          
          t                                                          
          c                                                          
          o                                                          
          m e                                                        
          L                                                          
          i                                                          
          t                                                          
          e                                                          
          r                                                          
          a                                                          
          t                                                          
          u                                                          
          r                                                          
          e                                                          
            A                                                        
            u t h o r s                                              
            Y                                                        
            e                                                        
            a                                                        
            r                                                        
              P                                                      
              u                                                      
              b                                                      
              l                                                      
              i                                                      
              s                                                      
              h                                                      
              e                                                      
              d                                                      
            R a                                                      
            n                                                        
            g                                                        
            e                                                        
              o f                                                    
              Y                                                      
              e                                                      
              a                                                      
              r                                                      
              s                                                      
               S t                                                   
               u                                                     
               d i                                                   
               e                                                     
               d                                                     
            N                                                        
            u                                                        
            m                                                        
            b                                                        
            e r                                                      
              o                                                      
              f                                                      
               S                                                     
               t                                                     
               u                                                     
               d i                                                   
               e                                                     
               s                                                     
            F                                                        
            o                                                        
            c                                                        
            u                                                        
            s                                                        
            C                                                        
            o n c l u s i o n s                                      
                 D i                                                 
                 G i u s e p                                         
                 p                                                   
                 e ,                                                 
                   M i l l e r , a n d T r e x l e r                 
                 1                                                   
                 9                                                   
                 7                                                   
                 7                                                   
                 1 9                                                 
                 7                                                   
                 0                                                   
                 –                                                   
                   1                                                 
                   9                                                 
                   7                                                 
                   7                                                 
                 2                                                   
                 6                                                   
                 P                                                   
                 u                                                   
                 b                                                   
                 l i                                                 
                 s                                                   
                 h                                                   
                 e                                                   
                 d                                                   
                 a                                                   
                 n                                                   
                 d                                                   
                   u                                                 
                   n                                                 
                   p                                                 
                   u                                                 
                   b                                                 
                   l                                                 
                   i                                                 
                   s                                                 
                   h                                                 
                   e                                                 
                   d                                                 
                   s                                                 
                   t                                                 
                   u                                                 
                   d                                                 
                   i                                                 
                   e                                                 
                   s                                                 
                    o                                                
                    f                                                
                    c                                                
                    h                                                
                    i l                                              
                    d                                                
                    r                                                
                    e                                                
                    n                                                
                    a                                                
                    n                                                
                    d                                                
                      a                                              
                      d                                              
                      u                                              
                      l                                              
                      t                                              
                      s .                                            
                 S                                                   
                 u                                                   
                 p p o r t f o r R E T , “ … a p p e                 
                 a r ( s ) g e n e r a l l                           
                 y p o                                               
                 s i t i v e , 7 p r o                               
                 m i s i n g , b u t f                               
                 a r f r o                                           
                 m                                                   
                   c o n c l u s i v e , ” p . 7 0 .                 
                       E                                             
                       n g l e s , G a r n e f                       
                         s                                           
                         k i                                         
                         ,                                           
                          a n d D i e k s t r                        
                            a                                        
                       1                                             
                       9                                             
                       9                                             
                       3                                             
                       1 9                                           
                       7                                             
                       0                                             
                       –                                             
                         1                                           
                         9                                           
                         8                                           
                         8                                           
                       3                                             
                       2                                             
                       P                                             
                       u                                             
                       b                                             
                       l i                                           
                       s                                             
                       h                                             
                       e                                             
                       d                                             
                       a                                             
                       n                                             
                       d                                             
                         u                                           
                         n                                           
                         p                                           
                         u                                           
                         b                                           
                         l                                           
                         i                                           
                         s                                           
                         h                                           
                         e                                           
                         d                                           
                         s                                           
                         t                                           
                         u                                           
                         d                                           
                         i                                           
                         e                                           
                         s                                           
                          o                                          
                          f                                          
                          c                                          
                          h                                          
                          i l                                        
                          d                                          
                          r                                          
                          e                                          
                          n                                          
                          a                                          
                          n                                          
                          d                                          
                            a                                        
                            d                                        
                            u                                        
                            l                                        
                            t                                        
                            s .                                      
                       “                                             
                       R                                             
                       E T o n t h e w h o l e w a s e f f           
                       e c t i v e c o m p a r                       
                       e d                                           
                       w i t h p l a c e b o                         
                       a n d n o t r e a t                           
                       m e n t                                       
                       .                                             
                         I t s e f f e c t s w e r e m a i n t a i n 
                         e d o v e r t i m e ,                       
                         a n d                                       
                         i t p r o d u c e d                         
                         a d e l a y e d t r e                       
                         a t m e                                     
                         n                                           
                         t                                           
                          e f f e c t w i t h r e g a r d t o b e h  
                          a v i o r a l o u t c o                    
                          m e c                                      
                          r i t e r i a , ” p . 1                    
                          0 8 8 .                                    
                             E                                       
                             s                                       
                             p o s i t o                             
                             2                                       
                             0                                       
                             0                                       
                             9                                       
                             1 9                                     
                             7                                       
                             2                                       
                             –                                       
                               2                                     
                               0                                     
                               0                                     
                               8                                     
                             7                                       
                             2                                       
                             (                                       
                             3                                       
                             9                                       
                             d                                       
                             i                                       
                             s                                       
                             -                                       
                               s                                     
                               e                                     
                               r                                     
                               t                                     
                               a t i                                 
                               o                                     
                               n                                     
                               s                                     
                                a                                    
                                n                                    
                                d                                    
                                3                                    
                                3                                    
                                  p                                  
                                  u                                  
                                  b                                  
                                  l i s                              
                                  h                                  
                                  e                                  
                                  d                                  
                                    a                                
                                    r                                
                                    t                                
                                    i                                
                                    c l e                            
                                    s                                
                                    )                                
                             P                                       
                             u                                       
                             b                                       
                             l i                                     
                             s                                       
                             h                                       
                             e                                       
                             d                                       
                             a                                       
                             n                                       
                             d                                       
                               u                                     
                               n                                     
                               p                                     
                               u                                     
                               b                                     
                               l                                     
                               i                                     
                               s                                     
                               h                                     
                               e                                     
                               d                                     
                               s                                     
                               t                                     
                               u                                     
                               d                                     
                               i                                     
                               e                                     
                               s                                     
                                o                                    
                                f                                    
                                c                                    
                                h                                    
                                i l                                  
                                d                                    
                                r                                    
                                e                                    
                                n                                    
                                .                                    
                             “                                       
                             T                                       
                             h e l a r g e s t e f f e c t s i z e s w e r
                             e f o u n d f o r r a                   
                             t i n g                                 
                             s b y i n d e p e                       
                             n d e n t o b s e r v                   
                             e r s ,                                 
                               f o l l o w e d b y s e l f - r e p o r t , t
                               e a c h e r r e p o r t ,             
                               t h e                                 
                               r a p i s t r e p o r t               
                               , a n d p a r e n t                   
                               r e p o r                             
                               t ,                                   
                                 a l t h o u g h t h e d i f f e r e n c e s
                                 w e r e n o t s i g n               
                                 i fi c a                            
                                 n t . A m o d e                     
                                 r a t e p o s i t i v e             
                                 e f f e c t                         
                                  s i z e w a s f o u n d f o r t h e o v
                                  e r a l l c o m p a r i s          
                                  o n                                
                                  o f R E B T t o                    
                                  c o n t r o l g r o u p            
                                  s .                                
                                    A s m a l l p o s i t i v e e f f e c t s i
                                    z e w a s f o u n d f            
                                    o r t                            
                                    h e o v e r a l l c              
                                    o m p a r i s o n o f            
                                    R E B                            
                                    T                                
                                     t o a l t e r n a t i v e g r o u p s . ”
                                       F                             
                                       o                             
                                       r d                           
                                       2                             
                                       0                             
                                       0                             
                                       9                             
                                       1 9                           
                                       9                             
                                       0                             
                                       –                             
                                        2                            
                                        0                            
                                        0                            
                                        8                            
                                       1                             
                                       9                             
                                       1                             
                                       P                             
                                       u                             
                                       b                             
                                       l i                           
                                       s                             
                                       h                             
                                       e                             
                                       d                             
                                       a                             
                                       n                             
                                       d                             
                                        u                            
                                        n                            
                                        p                            
                                        u                            
                                        b                            
                                        l                            
                                        i                            
                                        s                            
                                        h                            
                                        e                            
                                        d                            
                                        s                            
                                        t                            
                                        u                            
                                        d                            
                                        i                            
                                        e                            
                                        s                            
                                          o                          
                                          f                          
                                          c                          
                                          h                          
                                          i l                        
                                          d                          
                                          r                          
                                          e                          
                                          n                          
                                          a                          
                                          n                          
                                          d                          
                                           a                         
                                           d                         
                                           u                         
                                           l                         
                                           t                         
                                           s .                       
                                       R                             
                                       e                             
                                       s u l t s i n d i c a t e d t h a t m e a
                                       n t r e a t m e n t e f       
                                       f e c t                       
                                       s w e r e r o u g             
                                       h l y e q u i v a l e n       
                                       t                             
                                        ( p r e - 1 9 9 0 : w i t h i n R E B T
                                        = 0 . 8 9 , R E B            
                                        T v s .                      
                                        c o n t r o l =              
                                        0 . 5 6 , R E B T v          
                                        e r s u s                    
                                          a l t e r n a t i v e t r e a t m e n t =
                                          0 . 2 3 ; p o s t - 1 9 9  
                                          0 : w                      
                                          i t h i n R E B T          
                                         = 0 . 8 9 , R E B           
                                          T v e r                    
                                          s                          
                                          u                          
                                          s                          
                                           c o n t r o l = 0 . 5 7 , R E B T v e
                                           r s u s a l t e r n a t i 
                                           v e t r                   
                                           e a t m e n t =           
                                           – 0 . 0 4 ) a n d t h     
                                           a t m                     
                                           e                         
                                           a                         
                                           n                         
                                             s t u d y m e t h o d o l o g i c a l q u
                                             a l i t y r a t i n g s w
                                             e r e                   
                                             c o n s i s t e n t a   
                                             c r o s s t i m e p e   
                                             r i o d s               
                                              ( p r e - 1 9 9 0 = 5 . 9 1 ; p o s t - 1
                                              9 9 0 = 5 . 8 4 ) a    
                                              n d                    
                                              n o t c o r r e l a t e
                                              d w i t h e f f e c t  
                                              s i z e .              
                                                G                    
                                                o n z a l e z , N e l s o n
                                                 ,                   
                                                   G u t k i n       
                                                   ,                 
                                                    S a u n d e      
                                                    r                
                                                    s ,              
                                                      G a l l o w    
                                                      a              
                                                      y ,            
                                                       a n d S h w e r y
                                                2                    
                                                0                    
                                                0                    
                                                4                    
                                                1 9                  
                                                7                    
                                                2                    
                                                –                    
                                                 2                   
                                                 0                   
                                                 0                   
                                                 2                   
                                                1                    
                                                9                    
                                                P                    
                                                u                    
                                                b                    
                                                l i                  
                                                s                    
                                                h                    
                                                e                    
                                                d                    
                                                s                    
                                                t                    
                                                u                    
                                                d                    
                                                i                    
                                                e                    
                                                s                    
                                                o                    
                                                f                    
                                                 c                   
                                                 h                   
                                                 i                   
                                                 l                   
                                                 d                   
                                                 r                   
                                                 e                   
                                                 n                   
                                                 a                   
                                                 n                   
                                                 d                   
                                                   a                 
                                                   d                 
                                                   o                 
                                                   l                 
                                                   e                 
                                                   s                 
                                                   c                 
                                                   e                 
                                                   n                 
                                                   t                 
                                                   s                 
                                                   .                 
                                                “                    
                                                T                    
                                                h e o v e r a l l m e a n w e i g h t e
                                                d e f f e c t o f R E
                                                B T                  
                                                w a s p o s i t i v e
                                                a n d s i g n i fi c a
                                                n t . ”              
                                                 “ A n a l y s e s r e v e a l e d … (
                                                 a ) t h e r e w a s n
                                                 o s t               
                                                 a t i s t i c a l d i f f
                                                 e r e n c e b e t w e
                                                 e n                 
                                                   s t u d i e s i d e n t i fi e d l o w o r
                                                   h i g h i n i n t e r n
                                                   a l v             
                                                   a l i d i t y ; ( b )
                                                   R E B T a p p e a r
                                                   e d               
                                                    e q u a l l y e f f e c t i v e f o r c h i l
                                                    d r e n a n d a d o l
                                                    e s c e          
                                                    n t s p r e s e n t i
                                                    n g w i t h a n d
                                                    w i t h o        
                                                    u                
                                                    t                
                                                      i d e n t i fi e d p r o b l e m s ; ( c )
                                                      n o n - m e n t a l h
                                                      e a l t        
                                                      h p r o f e s s i o n
                                                      a l s p r o d u c e d
                                                      R E B          
                                                      T              
                                                       e f f e c t s o f g r e a t e r m a g n i t
                                                       u d e t h a n t h e i r
                                                       m e           
                                                       n t a l h e a l t h
                                                       c o u n t e r p a r t s ;
                                                       ( d ) t       
                                                       h             
                                                       e             
                                                         l o n g e r t h e d u r a t i o n o f R
                                                         E B T s e s s i o n s ,
                                                         t h e       
                                                         g r e a t e r t h e i
                                                         m p a c t , a n d
                                                          ( e ) c h i l d r e n b e n e fi t t e d
                                                          m o r e f r o m R E
                                                          B T t      
                                                          h a n a d o l e s c
                                                          e n t s , ” p . 2 2 2 . ( c o
                                                            n t i n u
                                                            e        
                                                            d        
                                                            )        
                                   193

=== Page 208 (1 cols) ===
T                                                              
      a                                                              
      b l                                                            
      e                                                              
      6 .                                                            
      4                                                              
      (                                                              
      c                                                              
      o                                                              
      n                                                              
      t                                                              
      i                                                              
      n                                                              
      u                                                              
      e                                                              
      d                                                              
      )                                                              
         A                                                           
         u                                                           
         t h                                                         
         o                                                           
         r                                                           
         s                                                           
         Y                                                           
         e                                                           
         a                                                           
         r                                                           
          P                                                          
          u                                                          
          b                                                          
          l                                                          
          i                                                          
          s                                                          
          h                                                          
          e                                                          
          d                                                          
         R a                                                         
         n                                                           
         g                                                           
         e                                                           
          o f                                                        
          Y                                                          
          e                                                          
          a                                                          
          r                                                          
          s                                                          
            S t                                                      
            u                                                        
            d i                                                      
            e                                                        
            d                                                        
         N                                                           
         u                                                           
         m                                                           
         b                                                           
         e                                                           
         r                                                           
          o                                                          
          f                                                          
            S                                                        
            t                                                        
            u                                                        
            d                                                        
            i                                                        
            e                                                        
            s                                                        
         F                                                           
         o                                                           
         c u s                                                       
         C                                                           
         o n                                                         
         c l u s i                                                   
         o n s                                                       
              G                                                      
              o                                                      
              s s                                                    
              e t                                                    
              t                                                      
              e                                                      
              a                                                      
              n                                                      
              d                                                      
               O ’                                                   
               B                                                     
               r                                                     
               i e                                                   
               n                                                     
              1                                                      
              9                                                      
              9                                                      
              2                                                      
              1 9                                                    
              7                                                      
              0                                                      
              –                                                      
               1                                                     
               9                                                     
               9                                                     
               0                                                     
              8                                                      
              5                                                      
              P                                                      
              u                                                      
              b l i s                                                
              h e d                                                  
              a n d                                                  
               u n p                                                 
               u b l i                                               
               s h e d                                               
               s                                                     
               t                                                     
               u                                                     
               d                                                     
               i                                                     
               e                                                     
               s                                                     
                 o f a                                               
                 d u l t                                             
                 s .                                                 
              “                                                      
              R                                                      
              E                                                      
              T w a s                                                
              e f f e c t i v e i n 2 5 %                            
              o f c o                                                
              m p a r i s o n s                                      
              , ” p                                                  
              . 9                                                    
              . R E T                                                
              r                                                      
              e s u l                                                
              t                                                      
              s i                                                    
              n                                                      
              “ …                                                    
              a                                                      
               d e                                                   
               c r e a s                                             
               e d s c o r e o n s c a l e s                         
               o f i r r                                             
               a t i o n a l i t y                                   
               …                                                     
               a                                                     
               p a r a l l                                           
               e l                                                   
               d e                                                   
               c                                                     
               r e a                                                 
               s                                                     
               e i n                                                 
                 s e l                                               
                 f - r e p                                           
                 o r t e d e m o t i o n a l d                       
                 i s t r e s s                                       
                 . O t h e r                                         
                 m e a                                               
                 s u r                                               
                 e s , n o                                           
                 t i                                                 
                 c e a                                               
                 b                                                   
                 l y                                                 
                 b                                                   
                 e h a v i                                           
                 o                                                   
                 r ,                                                 
                 w                                                   
                 e                                                   
                 r                                                   
                 e                                                   
                   i n                                               
                   s e n s i                                         
                   t i v e t o R E T . R E T                         
                   h a s l i t                                       
                   t l e o r n o                                     
                   p r a                                             
                   c t i                                             
                   c a l b e                                         
                   n                                                 
                   e fi t ,                                          
                   ”                                                 
                   p .                                               
                   2 0 .                                             
                    G                                                
                    o                                                
                    s s                                              
                    e t                                              
                    t                                                
                    e                                                
                    a                                                
                    n                                                
                    d                                                
                      O ’                                            
                      B                                              
                      r                                              
                      i e                                            
                      n                                              
                    1                                                
                    9                                                
                    9                                                
                    3                                                
                    1 9                                              
                    7                                                
                    4                                                
                    –                                                
                      1                                              
                      9                                              
                      9                                              
                      2                                              
                    3                                                
                    6                                                
                    P                                                
                    u                                                
                    b l i s                                          
                    h e d                                            
                    a n d                                            
                      u n p                                          
                      u b l i                                        
                      s h e d                                        
                      s                                              
                      t                                              
                      u                                              
                      d                                              
                      i                                              
                      e                                              
                      s                                              
                       o f c                                         
                       h i l d                                       
                       r e n a                                       
                       n                                             
                       d                                             
                         a d o                                       
                         l e s c                                     
                         e n t s .                                   
                    R                                                
                    E T                                              
                    h a s l                                          
                    i t t l e o r n o p r a c t i c                  
                    a l b e n                                        
                    e fi t . T h e                                   
                    m o                                              
                    s t                                              
                    d i s t i n c                                    
                    t i                                              
                    v e                                              
                    o                                                
                    u t c                                            
                    o m e o                                          
                    f                                                
                    R                                                
                    E                                                
                    T                                                
                    i s                                              
                      a                                              
                      d e c r e                                      
                      a s e i n t h e e n d o r s e                  
                      m e n t                                        
                      o f i r r a t i o                              
                      n a l                                          
                      b e                                            
                      l i e f s , p                                  
                      .                                              
                      2 1 .                                          
                      W e                                            
                      c a n c                                        
                      o                                              
                      n                                              
                      c l                                            
                      u                                              
                      d                                              
                      e                                              
                       t h                                           
                       a t c o                                       
                       n t i n u e d u s e o f R E                   
                       T i n t                                       
                       h e c l a s s r                               
                       o o m                                         
                       i s                                           
                       u n j u s                                     
                       t i                                           
                       fi e d                                        
                       ,                                             
                       i n                                           
                       f                                             
                       a c t ,                                       
                         c o                                         
                         n t r a i                                   
                         n d i c a t e d , p . 2 3 .                 
                          H                                          
                          a                                          
                          a g                                        
                          a                                          
                          a n                                        
                          d                                          
                            D a                                      
                            v                                        
                            i                                        
                            d s                                      
                            o                                        
                            n                                        
                          1                                          
                          9                                          
                          8                                          
                          9                                          
                          1 9                                        
                          7                                          
                          0                                          
                          –                                          
                            1                                        
                            9                                        
                            8                                        
                            7                                        
                          6                                          
                          9                                          
                          P                                          
                          u                                          
                          b l i s                                    
                          h e d                                      
                          a n d                                      
                            u n p                                    
                            u b l i                                  
                            s h e d                                  
                            s                                        
                            t                                        
                            u                                        
                            d                                        
                            i                                        
                            e                                        
                            s                                        
                             o f a                                   
                             d u l t                                 
                             s .                                     
                               H                                     
                               a                                     
                               j                                     
                               z l                                   
                               e                                     
                               r                                     
                               a                                     
                               n                                     
                               d                                     
                                B e                                  
                                r                                    
                                n                                    
                                a r                                  
                                d                                    
                               1                                     
                               9                                     
                               9                                     
                               0                                     
                               1 9                                   
                               7                                     
                               0                                     
                               –                                     
                                1                                    
                                9                                    
                                8                                    
                                2                                    
                               4                                     
                               5                                     
                               P                                     
                               u                                     
                               b l i s                               
                               h e d                                 
                               a n d                                 
                                u n p                                
                                u b l i                              
                                s h e d                              
                                s                                    
                                t                                    
                                u                                    
                                d                                    
                                i                                    
                                e                                    
                                s                                    
                                  o f c                              
                                  h i l d                            
                                  r e n a                            
                                  n                                  
                                  d                                  
                                   a d o                             
                                   l e s c                           
                                   e n t s .                         
                               “                                     
                              …                                      
                               s u p p                               
                               o r t f o r t h e n o t i o n         
                               t h a t c                             
                               h a n g e s i                         
                               n i r r                               
                               a t i                                 
                               o n a l i t                           
                               y                                     
                               a n                                   
                               d                                     
                               c h                                   
                               a                                     
                               n g e s i                             
                               n                                     
                               o                                     
                               t                                     
                               h                                     
                               e                                     
                               r                                     
                                d i                                  
                                m e n s                              
                                i o n o f p s y c h o l o g i c      
                                a l f u n                            
                                c t i o n i n g .                    
                                ” “                                  
                                …                                    
                                c h a n                              
                                g e                                  
                                s h                                  
                                a                                    
                                v e                                  
                                b                                    
                                e e n                                
                                  m                                  
                                  a i n t a                          
                                  i n e d a t f o l l o w - u p      
                                  p e r i o d                        
                                  s , ” p . 3 1 .                    
                                     J                               
                                     o                               
                                     r                               
                                     m                               
                                     1                               
                                     9                               
                                     8                               
                                     9                               
                                     1 9                             
                                     7                               
                                     1                               
                                     –                               
                                      1                              
                                      9                              
                                      8                              
                                      6                              
                                     1                               
                                     6                               
                                     S                               
                                     t                               
                                     u d i e                         
                                     s o f                           
                                     a n y t                         
                                     y                               
                                     p                               
                                     e                               
                                     o                               
                                     f                               
                                      t h e                          
                                      o r y t                        
                                      h a t i                        
                                      n                              
                                      c                              
                                      l                              
                                      u                              
                                      d                              
                                      e                              
                                        a m                          
                                        e a s u                      
                                        r e o f                      
                                        t                            
                                        r                            
                                        a                            
                                        i                            
                                        t                            
                                         a n x                       
                                         i e t y                     
                                         o r                         
                                           n e u                     
                                           r o t i                   
                                           c i s m .                 
                                     “                               
                                     W h                             
                                     i l e R                         
                                     E T a n d r e l a t e d t h     
                                     e r a p i e                     
                                     s p r o v e d                   
                                     s u p                           
                                     e r i                           
                                     o r i n t                       
                                     h                               
                                     e p r                           
                                     e                               
                                     s e                             
                                     n                               
                                     t                               
                                      m                              
                                      e t a - a                      
                                      n a l y s i s ( t o o t h e r t
                                      h e r a p i                    
                                      e s ) , t h i s                
                                      c o n                          
                                      c l u                          
                                      s i o n i s                    
                                      l                              
                                      i m i                          
                                      t                              
                                      e d                            
                                      b                              
                                      y t h e                        
                                      b                              
                                      r                              
                                      e                              
                                      a                              
                                      d                              
                                      t                              
                                      h                              
                                        o f                          
                                        s t u d i                    
                                        e s a v a i l a b l e , ” p . 2
                                        5 .                          
                                            L                        
                                            y                        
                                            o                        
                                            n                        
                                            s                        
                                            a                        
                                            n                        
                                            d                        
                                              W                      
                                              o                      
                                              o                      
                                              d s                    
                                            1                        
                                            9                        
                                            9                        
                                            1                        
                                            1 9                      
                                            7                        
                                            0                        
                                            –                        
                                              1                      
                                              9                      
                                              8                      
                                              8                      
                                            7                        
                                            0                        
                                            P                        
                                            u                        
                                            b l i s                  
                                            h e d                    
                                            a n d                    
                                              u n p                  
                                              u b l i                
                                              s h e d                
                                              s                      
                                              t                      
                                              u                      
                                              d                      
                                              i                      
                                              e                      
                                              s                      
                                               o f c                 
                                               h i l d               
                                               r e n a               
                                               n                     
                                               d                     
                                                 a d u               
                                                 l t s .             
                                            “                        
                                            T                        
                                            h e                      
                                            r e s u                  
                                            l t s d e m o n s t r a t e d t
                                            h a t R                  
                                            E T i s a n              
                                            e f f e                  
                                            c t i                    
                                            v e f o r                
                                            m                        
                                            o f                      
                                            t                        
                                            h e r                    
                                            a                        
                                            p y . T                  
                                            h                        
                                            e                        
                                              e f                    
                                              fi c a c y             
                                              w a s m o s t c l e a r l y
                                              d e m o                
                                              n s t r a t e d        
                                              w h e                  
                                              n                      
                                              R E T w                
                                              a                      
                                              s c o                  
                                              m p                    
                                              a                      
                                              r e d t o              
                                               b a                   
                                               s e l i n             
                                               e o r o t h e r f o r m s o f
                                               c o n t               
                                               r o l s . E f f e     
                                               c t s i               
                                               z e s                 
                                               w e r e               
                                               l a                   
                                               r g e                 
                                               s                     
                                               t f o                 
                                               r                     
                                               d e p e               
                                               n                     
                                               d                     
                                               e                     
                                               n                     
                                               t                     
                                                 m                   
                                                 e a s u r           
                                                 e s l o w i n r e a c t i v i t
                                                 y ( i . e . ,       
                                                 l o w r e a c       
                                                 t i v i             
                                                 t y                 
                                                = b e h              
                                                 a                   
                                                 v i o r             
                                                 a                   
                                                 l o                 
                                                 r                   
                                                 p h y s i           
                                                 o                   
                                                 l                   
                                                 o                   
                                                 g                   
                                                 i                   
                                                 c                   
                                                 a l                 
                                                  m                  
                                                  e a s u r          
                                                  e s ; h i g h r e a c t i v i t y
                                                  = m e              
                                                  a s u r e s o f    
                                                  i r r a            
                                                  t i o              
                                                  n a l t h          
                                                  i                  
                                                  n k i              
                                                  n                  
                                                  g ) , ”            
                                                  p . 6 8 .          
                                                    M                
                                                    a                
                                                    h                
                                                    o                
                                                    n                
                                                    e y              
                                                    1                
                                                    9                
                                                    7                
                                                    4                
                                                    1 9              
                                                    6                
                                                    3                
                                                    –                
                                                     1               
                                                     9               
                                                     7               
                                                     4               
                                                    1                
                                                    0                
                                                    P                
                                                    u                
                                                    b l i s          
                                                    h e d            
                                                    a n d            
                                                     u n p           
                                                     u b l i         
                                                     s h e d         
                                                     s               
                                                     t               
                                                     u               
                                                     d               
                                                     i               
                                                     e               
                                                     s               
                                                       o f c         
                                                       o g n i       
                                                       t i v e       
                                                        r e s t      
                                                        r u c t      
                                                        u r i n g    
                                                        a            
                                                        n            
                                                        d            
                                                          R E        
                                                          T .        
                                                    R                
                                                    E T              
                                                    “ …              
                                                    h a s y e t t o b e a d e q
                                                    u a t e l        
                                                    y d e m o n s    
                                                    t r a t          
                                                    e d              
                                                    ” a n d          
                                                    “                
                                                    …                
                                                    m a y            
                                                    b e v i e        
                                                    w                
                                                    e                
                                                    d                
                                                    a                
                                                    s                
                                                     t e             
                                                     n t a t i       
                                                     v e l y p r o m i s i n g , ” p .
                                                     1 8 2 .         
                                194

=== Page 209 (1 cols) ===
M c G o                                                   
           v                                                         
           e r                                                       
           n                                                         
             a n d S i l v                                           
               e                                                     
               r                                                     
               m                                                     
               a                                                     
               n                                                     
           1                                                         
           9                                                         
           8                                                         
           4                                                         
           1                                                         
           9                                                         
           7                                                         
           7                                                         
           –                                                         
             1                                                       
             9                                                       
             8                                                       
             2                                                       
           4                                                         
           7                                                         
           P                                                         
           u                                                         
           b l i s h e d a n d u n p u b l i s h e d                 
             s t                                                     
             u                                                       
             d                                                       
             i                                                       
             e                                                       
             s                                                       
               o f c h i l d r e n a                                 
               n                                                     
               d                                                     
                a d u l t s .                                        
           “                                                         
           … t h e r e                                               
           w e r                                                     
           e                                                         
           3 1                                                       
           s t                                                       
           u                                                         
           d i                                                       
           e s f                                                     
           a v o r i n                                               
           g                                                         
           R E                                                       
           T .                                                       
           I                                                         
           n t h                                                     
           e                                                         
           r                                                         
           e m                                                       
           a                                                         
           i n i n g                                                 
           s                                                         
           t u d i e s                                               
           , t                                                       
           h e                                                       
           R                                                         
           E                                                         
           T                                                         
             t r e a t m e n                                         
             t g r                                                   
             o                                                       
             u p s                                                   
             a                                                       
             l                                                       
             l s                                                     
             h o                                                     
             w e d i m                                               
             p r                                                     
             o v                                                     
             e                                                       
             m                                                       
             e                                                       
             n t                                                     
             a                                                       
             n                                                       
             d                                                       
             i n                                                     
             n o s t u                                               
             d                                                       
             y w a s                                                 
             a n                                                     
             o t                                                     
             h                                                       
             e r                                                     
               t r e a t m e n                                       
               t m                                                   
               e                                                     
               t                                                     
               h o                                                   
               d                                                     
               s                                                     
               i g                                                   
               n i fi                                                
               c a n t l y                                           
               b                                                     
               e t t                                                 
               e r                                                   
               t                                                     
               h                                                     
               a n                                                   
               R                                                     
               E                                                     
               T , ”                                                 
               p . 1 6 .                                             
                  O e i , H                                          
                  a                                                  
                  n                                                  
                  s                                                  
                  e                                                  
                  n ,                                                
                   a n d                                             
                   M i                                               
                   l                                                 
                   l                                                 
                   e                                                 
                   r                                                 
                  1                                                  
                  9                                                  
                  9                                                  
                  3                                                  
                  1                                                  
                  9                                                  
                  8                                                  
                  2                                                  
                  –                                                  
                   1                                                 
                   9                                                 
                   8                                                 
                   8                                                 
                  9                                                  
                  S                                                  
                  t                                                  
                  u d i e s d e s i g n e                            
                  d                                                  
                  t                                                  
                  o                                                  
                   a s s e s s w h e t h                             
                   e r                                               
                     i r r a t i o n a l b e l                       
                     i e                                             
                     f                                               
                     s                                               
                      m e d i a t e c h a                            
                      n g                                            
                      e                                              
                      i                                              
                      n                                              
                        o t h e r p s y c h o                        
                        l o                                          
                        g                                            
                        i                                            
                        c                                            
                        a                                            
                        l                                            
                         c o n s t r u c t s .                       
                  “                                                  
                  T                                                  
                  h i s r e v i e                                    
                  w d                                                
                  e                                                  
                  m o                                                
                  n s                                                
                  t                                                  
                  r a t                                              
                  e s                                                
                  t h a t w                                          
                  h i                                                
                  l e                                                
                  R                                                  
                  E                                                  
                  T                                                  
                  h a                                                
                  s                                                  
                  b                                                  
                  e e n                                              
                  d e m o                                            
                  n                                                  
                  s t r a t e                                        
                  d t                                                
                  o                                                  
                  b                                                  
                  e                                                  
                  a                                                  
                  n                                                  
                   e f f e c t i v e                                 
                   t h e                                             
                   r                                                 
                   a                                                 
                   p e                                               
                   u t                                               
                   i                                                 
                   c i                                               
                   n t e                                             
                   r v e n t i                                       
                   o                                                 
                   n f o                                             
                   r                                                 
                   a                                                 
                   v a r i                                           
                   e                                                 
                   t                                                 
                   y                                                 
                   o f                                               
                   t                                                 
                   a r g e t                                         
                   p                                                 
                   r o b l e                                         
                   m s ,                                             
                   t                                                 
                   h                                                 
                   e                                                 
                   r e                                               
                   i                                                 
                   s                                                 
                     n o e v i d e                                   
                     n c e                                           
                     t                                               
                     o s                                             
                     h o                                             
                     w i                                             
                     m p                                             
                     r o v e m                                       
                     e                                               
                     n t i                                           
                     n                                               
                     R                                               
                     E T                                             
                     i s                                             
                     d                                               
                     u e                                             
                     t                                               
                     o c h a                                         
                     n                                               
                     g i n g i                                       
                     r r a                                           
                     t i                                             
                     o                                               
                     n                                               
                     a l                                             
                      b e l i e f s t o                              
                      r a t                                          
                      i                                              
                      o                                              
                      n a                                            
                      l                                              
                      b                                              
                      e l i                                          
                      e f s ,                                        
                      ” p . 9 9                                      
                      .                                              
                           P                                         
                           o l d e r                                 
                           1                                         
                           9                                         
                           8                                         
                           6                                         
                           R                                         
                           E B T y i e l d                           
                           e d                                       
                           h                                         
                           i                                         
                           g h                                       
                           e r                                       
                           e f f                                     
                           e c t                                     
                           s i z e s t                               
                           h a                                       
                           n                                         
                           o t                                       
                           h                                         
                           e                                         
                           r f o                                     
                           r                                         
                           m                                         
                           s o f                                     
                           C B T .                                   
                            S                                        
                            i l v e r                                
                            m                                        
                            a                                        
                            n                                        
                            ,                                        
                              M c                                    
                              C                                      
                              a r                                    
                              t                                      
                              h                                      
                              y ,                                    
                               a n d M c                             
                                 G                                   
                                 o                                   
                                 v                                   
                                 -                                   
                                  e r n                              
                            1                                        
                            9                                        
                            9                                        
                            2                                        
                            1                                        
                            9                                        
                            8                                        
                            2                                        
                            –                                        
                              1                                      
                              9                                      
                              8                                      
                              9                                      
                            8                                        
                            9                                        
                            P                                        
                            u                                        
                            b l i s h e d a n d u n p u b l i s h e d
                              s t                                    
                              u                                      
                              d                                      
                              i                                      
                              e                                      
                              s                                      
                               w i t h c h i l d r e                 
                               n ,                                   
                                 a d o l e s c e n t s ,             
                                 a                                   
                                 n                                   
                                 d                                   
                                  a d u l t s .                      
                            “                                        
                            … 4 9 s t u d                            
                            i e s                                    
                            r                                        
                            e                                        
                            s u l                                    
                            t e                                      
                            d i                                      
                            n p                                      
                            o s i t i v e                            
                            fi                                       
                            n d i                                    
                            n                                        
                            g s                                      
                            f o r                                    
                            R                                        
                            E                                        
                            T . ”                                    
                            W h e                                    
                            n                                        
                            c o m p                                  
                            a r e                                    
                            d                                        
                            t                                        
                            o                                        
                              o t h e r t r e                        
                              a t m                                  
                              e                                      
                              n t s                                  
                              ,                                      
                             …                                       
                              n o                                    
                              o t h e r t                            
                              r e                                    
                              a t                                    
                              m e                                    
                              n                                      
                              t                                      
                              s w                                    
                              e                                      
                              r                                      
                              e                                      
                              f o                                    
                              u                                      
                              n d t o                                
                              b                                      
                              e s i g                                
                              n i fi                                 
                              c a                                    
                              n                                      
                              t                                      
                              l y                                    
                               b e t t e r t h                       
                               a n                                   
                               R                                     
                               E T .                                 
                                    T                                
                                    r i p , V e r                    
                                     n                               
                                     o                               
                                     n ,                             
                                       a n d M c                     
                                        M                            
                                        a                            
                                        h                            
                                        o                            
                                        n                            
                                    2                                
                                    0                                
                                    0                                
                                    7                                
                                    1                                
                                    9                                
                                    7                                
                                    0                                
                                    –                                
                                     2                               
                                     0                               
                                     0                               
                                     6                               
                                    2                                
                                    6                                
                                    P                                
                                    u                                
                                    b l i s h e d s t u d i          
                                    e s                              
                                    w                                
                                    i                                
                                    t                                
                                    h                                
                                     c h i l d r e n a n d a d o l e s c e n t s .
                                    “                                
                                    R                                
                                    a t i o n a l E                  
                                    m o                              
                                    t i                              
                                    v e                              
                                    E                                
                                    d                                
                                    u c                              
                                    a t i                            
                                    o n h a d                        
                                    a                                
                                    p o                              
                                    w                                
                                    e r                              
                                    f                                
                                    u l                              
                                    e f                              
                                    f                                
                                    e                                
                                    c t                              
                                    o                                
                                    n l e s s                        
                                    e                                
                                    n i n g i                        
                                    r r a                            
                                    t i                              
                                    o                                
                                    n                                
                                    a l                              
                                     b e l i e f s a n               
                                     d d                             
                                     y                               
                                     s                               
                                     f u                             
                                     n c                             
                                     t                               
                                     i o                             
                                     n a l                           
                                     b e h a v                       
                                     i o                             
                                     r s ,                           
                                     p l                             
                                     u                               
                                     s                               
                                     a                               
                                     m                               
                                     o                               
                                     d e r                           
                                     a                               
                                     t e e f f e                     
                                     c                               
                                     t c o n                         
                                     c e r                           
                                     n i                             
                                     n                               
                                     g                               
                                       p o s i t i v e i             
                                       n f e                         
                                       r                             
                                       e                             
                                       n c                           
                                       e                             
                                       m a                           
                                       k i n                         
                                       g a n d                       
                                       d e                           
                                       c r e                         
                                       a s                           
                                       i                             
                                       n                             
                                       g n                           
                                       e                             
                                       g                             
                                       a                             
                                       t i v                         
                                       e                             
                                       e m o t                       
                                       i                             
                                       o n s . ”                     
                                      …                              
                                       “                             
                                       E f                           
                                       f                             
                                       e c                           
                                       t                             
                                        s i z e s i n c r            
                                        e a s                        
                                        e                            
                                        d                            
                                        f r                          
                                        o                            
                                        m                            
                                        m                            
                                        e d i                        
                                        u m t o                      
                                        l a                          
                                        r g e                        
                                        w                            
                                        h                            
                                        e n                          
                                        t                            
                                        h                            
                                        e                            
                                        s u                          
                                        b                            
                                        j e c t s                    
                                        w                            
                                        e r e c                      
                                        h i l d                      
                                        r e                          
                                        n                            
                                        a                            
                                        n                            
                                        d                            
                                          a d o l e s c e            
                                          n t s                      
                                          c                          
                                          o                          
                                          m                          
                                          p a                        
                                          r                          
                                          e d                        
                                          t o                        
                                          y o u n g                  
                                          a                          
                                          d u l                      
                                          t s .                      
                                          ”                          
                                           Z                         
                                           e t t l e                 
                                           a                         
                                           n                         
                                           d                         
                                             H a y                   
                                             e                       
                                             s                       
                                           1                         
                                           9                         
                                           8                         
                                           0                         
                                           1                         
                                           9                         
                                           5                         
                                           7                         
                                           –                         
                                             1                       
                                             9                       
                                             7                       
                                             9                       
                                           2                         
                                           0                         
                                           P                         
                                           u                         
                                           b l i s h e d a n d u n p u b l i s h e d
                                             s t                     
                                             u                       
                                             d                       
                                             i                       
                                             e                       
                                             s                       
                                              w i t h c o l l e g e s t u d e n t s a n d
                                                a                    
                                                d                    
                                                u                    
                                                l                    
                                                t                    
                                                s                    
                                                .                    
                                           “                         
                                           … t h e c l i             
                                           n i c                     
                                           a l                       
                                           e f                       
                                           fi c                      
                                           a                         
                                           c y                       
                                           h a                       
                                           s y e t t                 
                                           o                         
                                           b e                       
                                           a d                       
                                           e                         
                                           q                         
                                           u a t                     
                                           e                         
                                           l                         
                                           y                         
                                           d e                       
                                           m o n s t r               
                                           a                         
                                           t e d , ”                 
                                           p .                       
                                           1 6                       
                                           1                         
                                           .                         
                                   195

=== Page 210 (1 cols) ===
196   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      We found only 13 studies were mentioned in 5 reviews; 3 studies were included in 6
      reviews; and 124 studies were mentioned in just 1 review. The reviews have very low
      agreement on which studies they included. Most of the reviews ignored, excluded, or
      failed to uncover a sizable number of studies from the time period they selected from.
      The most inclusive reviews were the two by Silverman and colleagues (McGovern &
      Silverman, 1984; Silverman et al., 1992).                      
        Wefoundmore than70 REBToutcomestudiesnotreportedbythereviews.Although
      some of these were published after the reviews were published, many appeared during the
      period from which the reviews sampled studies. More than 350 REBT outcome studies
      have been found. A substantial number of studies exist that compare REBT to no treat-
      ment, waiting lists, or placebo controls, and support the efficacy of REBT across a wide
      range of problems including: social, testing, math, performance, and public speaking
      anxiety, agoraphobia, neuroticism, stress, depression, anger, teacher burnout, personal-
      ity disorder, obsessive compulsive disorder, marriage and relationship problems, alcohol
      abuse, poor dating skills, overweight/obesity, school discipline problems, unassertive-
      ness, Type A behavior, parenting problems, emotional reactions to learning disabilities,
      school underachievement, sexual fears and dysfunction, and bulimia.
        The review of Gonzalez et al. (2004) was more restrictive, selecting only 19 rigor-
      ous studies, and concluded that REBT is equally effective for children and adolescents
      presenting with (45 effect sizes) and without (13 effect sizes) disturbances. Based on
      56 effect sizes, a medium weighted effect was obtained for the REBT compared with
      control groups. Authors coded outcomes for anxiety, disruptive behaviors, irrationality,
      self-concept, and grade point average, and for all outcomes the improvements following
      REBT were significant. REBT worked best for reducing anxiety and irrationality and
      improving grades. Similar medium size effects were obtained when comparing REBT
      with alternative treatment or with no treatment control groups. Best results were found
      when applying REBT to elementary school children and high-school adolescents.
        Despite the larger number of investigations of REBT, the overwhelming majority of
      studiescomparedREBTwithanocontact,waitinglist,orplacebocondition.Fewstudies
      compare REBT with a viable, alternative treatment. Although REBT is better than no
      treatment or placebo treatments for many problems, there is no evidence that it is more
      efficacious than alternative treatments or that there is one condition for which it is the
      treatment of choice.                                           
        Also, the research has provided little to advance our knowledge concerning the best
      way to practice REBT. Does the inclusion of imagery, written homework forms, bib-
      liotherapy, or the style of disputation make a difference in the outcome? How many
      sessions of REBT are necessary for clinical improvement? Researchers have failed to
      explore which are the critical components of REBT. However, considerable research
      by Mersch and Emmelkamp (Mersch, Emmelkamp, Bogels, & Van der Sleen, 1989;
      Mersch,Emmelkamp,&Lipps,1991;Mersch,Hildebrand,Lavy,Wessel,&vandeHout,

=== Page 211 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 197
                                                                     
          1992) indicates that in vivo exposure exercises are a critical component to REBT with
          social phobia. Also, no studies have addressed the issues of whether the positive effects
                                                                     
          of REBT are obtained by changing clients’ irrational beliefs before change occurs in
          other dependent measures (Oei et al., 1993). The meta-analysis by Lyons and Woods
          (1991) suggested that more psychotherapy sessions produced greater effect size and that
          more experienced psychotherapists produced larger effect sizes than less experienced
          psychotherapists. They concluded that dependent measures low in reactivity produced
          higher effect sizes than measures high in reactivity. These findings are the opposite of
          those reported by Gossette and O’Brien (1992, 1993). Several reviews indicated that no
                                                                     
          alternative treatment was more efficacious than REBT.      
            Generally, psychotherapy research with children and adolescents has lagged behind
          research with adults (Kazdin & Weisz, 2010). This has also been true of research in
          REBT. Sixty-nine studies mentioned by the reviewer had been done with children and
          adolescents. However, the majority of these studies could be considered analogue studies
          or tests of REBT as a preventive intervention because they focused on using REBT with
          normal children in groups or in classrooms. Studies of clinically diagnosed children and
                                                                     
          adolescents are less represented.                          
            The meta-analysis by Trip, Vernon, and McMahon (2007) was focused on effective-
          ness of the classroom Rational Emotive Education in promoting mental health and
          reducing subclinical problems. Authors combined results from 26 published studies.
          Results obtained showed that REE is effective in producing changes in emotional,
          cognitive, and behavioral outcomes, and is most efficient with reducing irrational
          beliefs and behavior modification. This review showed an overall medium effect size
                                                                     
          for REE compared with the baseline, control group and placebo group, and large
          effect sizes compared to other interventions, like relaxation, self-instructional training,
          human relationship, or experiential therapies. These effects were maintained at
          follow-up. Larger effect sizes (d                          
                              =                                      
                               .92) were obtained for longer interventions but no
          significant differences were obtained between the short- (4 meetings) or long-term ones
          (17 meetings). Effectiveness of the REE was moderated by the problem presented or
          by the population, higher effect sizes being obtained for children and adolescents with
          subclinical problems. In terms of the type of the subclinical problem presented, the
          REE worked best for academic and anxiety problems (high range) and moderately for
          behavior problems. Bernard (1990) showed that an REBT program decreased teacher
          stress. Although more research is needed, these studies suggest that psychologists may
          find REBT useful in educational settings.                  
            Meta-analytic reviews of psychotherapy with children and adolescents have demon-
          strated (Weisz, Weiss, Alicke, & Klotz, 1987; see Kazdin & Weisz, 2010, for a review)
          that behavioral and cognitive therapies produce more change than nonbehavioral or
          traditional, nondirective, or play therapies. Because REBT shares many similarities with
          other behavioral and cognitive therapies, there is good reason to suspect that research in

=== Page 212 (1 cols) ===
198   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      REBT with children and adolescents will continue to support its effectiveness. However,
      there are many unanswered questions. Is REBT better than other forms of psychother-
      apy? Is REBT more efficacious than other CBT or behavioral interventions? Is there
      a problem for which REBT is the treatment of choice? It is important for research to
      address the effectiveness of specific techniques in REBT with children and adolescents.
      Do all children benefit from logical disputing, or can rehearsing rational coping skills
      without disputing be as effective? Although there is some evidence to indicate that chil-
      dren can benefit from REBT written homework forms (Miller & Kassinove, 1978), do
      all children benefit from the bibliotherapy and written homework sheets frequently used
      in REBT? REBT has also been shown to be effective with culturally diverse populations
      (Sapp, 1994, 1996; Sapp & Farrell, 1994; Sapp, Farrell, & Durand, 1995).
        The REBT parent training program developed by Joyce (1988) was proved to be
      effective in improving parents’ emotional reactions to their children. Graves (1996)
      expanded on Joyce’s program and demonstrated that the program could reduce stress
      and improve parenting skills in parents of Down syndrome children.
        The efficacy of the Rational Positive Parenting program (Gavita et al., 2013; Gavita,
      2011) was recently investigated in rigorous studies, with different formats, for various
      populations, and its efficacy in addressing child and adolescent externalizing and inter-
      nalizing problems has been documented. The program in the standard 10 sessions group
      format was found (David, 2014; Gavita, 2011) to be efficacious in the treatment of
      child externalizing behavior, compared to wait-list, and producing more generalized and
      long-lasting results compared to the standard cognitive-behavioral parenting programs.
      The mechanisms of change of the program were analyzed and found to be both improve-
      mentsinparentaldistressandparenting.Moreover,theprogramwasfound(Gavitaetal.,
      2012) efficacious in a short, four-session, group format for reducing fostered children and
      adolescent disruptive behavior.                                
        The short format of RPP was investigated (Gavita & C˘ alin, 2013) also as a self-help
      format, compared with the RETMAN therapeutic stories (David, 2010) for children
      in reducing externalizing and internalizing syndromes in elementary school children.
      Children in the RETMAN therapeutic stories group obtained greater improvement
      compared to the short RPP program for teacher-reported externalizing syndromes,
      child-reported anger experienced in school, and irrational demands for fairness. The
      short RPP program brought higher improvements in turn for the parenting dimensions
      of laxness and verbosity.                                      
        The technology and game-based innovative REBT tools were recently investigated
      for their effects in helping children become more emotionally resilient. Preliminary
      positive effects of the RETMAN cartoons and robotic system were documented (David
      & David, 2013) for helping elementary school children manage their test anxiety. Both
      the roboRETMAN and the cartoons worked better and children reported more positive
      effects after playing with the roboRETMAN. This is one of the first studies investigating

=== Page 213 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 199
                                                                     
          efficacy of REBT-based rational statements as emotion-regulation strategies in children
          when facing dysfunctional emotions and its results are very important for offering
                                                                     
          insights on the tools can be used for making them accessible.
                                                                     
          CONCLUSION                                                 
                                                                     
          Although REBT was one of the original cognitive behavior therapies, it has changed
          significantly since it was introduced by Ellis more than 60 years ago. The theory focuses
          on the role of irrational, dogmatic, and rigid thinking in causing psychopathology. Irra-
                                                                     
          tional beliefs are tacit, pervasive, rigid schematic representations of the way the world is
          and ought to be. These beliefs are both factual and evaluative. Beliefs are irrational
          when they are rigidly held in the face of evidence that they are logically inconsis-
          tent, anti-empirical, and self-defeating. The theory discriminates between adaptive and
          maladaptive emotions. Its goal is not to eliminate negative emotion, but to replace mal-
          adaptive negative emotions with more adaptive negative emotions, and to help people
          better their lives when they are free of emotional disturbance.
                                                                     
            The primary techniques of REBT involve challenging and replacing dysfunctional
          irrational beliefs. Many logical, empirical, and functional strategies for challenging
          beliefs are recommended. In addition, REBT employs a wide range of behavioral, imag-
          inal, and emotive exercises to bring about change. The theory stresses the importance
          of rehearsal of new ways of thinking, and almost any technique that accomplishes this
          purpose is appropriate.                                    
            Although REBT was originally designed for neurotic adults, it has been used with
                                                                     
          children and adolescents for more than 35 years. It follows a psychoeducational model
          that allows it to be used in groups, workshops, and classrooms as a preventive pro-
          cedure. Because of its psychoeducational format, REBT can easily be integrated into
          educational settings. It can be used in an educational format to teach students, parents,
          and teachers how to reduce their emotional disturbance and improve their productivity.
          REBT provides a model for school mental health services including direct service and
          consultation.                                              
                                                                     
            REBT has focused from its beginnings on adapting its tools to children. Thus, many
          toolshavebeendevelopedforbuildingchildemotionalresiliency,amongwhichthether-
          apeutic or rational stories for children (i.e., the RETMAN comics and rational stories;
          David, 2010). Knowing that children are gadget users, the future of REBT address-
          ing this population lies in the continuous development of its tools and incorporation
          with technology. Steps have been made towards developing the first therapeutic car-
                                                                     
          toons, and robotic device, thus making REBT a pioneer in this field. Game-based online
          components of the RETMAN robotic system are currently in work for addressing mental
          health problems in adolescents. Future studies need to clarify the best ways in which the
          tools should be used for maximizing their benefits.

=== Page 214 (1 cols) ===
200   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        REBT can be integrated with family systems notions to work with parents. The the-
      ory helps identify clients’ thinking that reinforces dysfunctional family homeostasis. The
      use of REBT techniques can eliminate parents’ emotional disturbance freeing them
      to explore and follow more productive models of relating and parenting. There are
      important questions to be answered regarding parenting interventions concerning the
      long-term outcomes and mechanisms of change for children.      
        A substantial body of research supports the efficacy of REBT. However, this research
      has employed too few designs and been limited to comparing REBT with no contact or
      placebo controls. Future research could focus on identifying the crucial techniques of
      REBT, the problems and populations for which it is best suited, and more efficient ways
      of helping clients.                                            
      Case Study                                                     
      Michele M. was a 10-year-old fifth grader, referred in February by her mother because
      of social problems. Michele had few friends in her neighborhood, and was teased by her
      classroom peers. She had one good friend in class for the past several years, Sangitha.
      Michele had had difficulty making friends for several years. Her mother believed that her
      social difficulties resulted because she was rigid, did not share well, and wanted things
      her way. In September of this school year, a new girl entered Michele’s class and became
      friendly with her only friend. The newcomer set up a competition between herself and
      Michele for Sangitha’s friendship. The newcomer teased Michele and encouraged the
      other girls to do the same. Michele frequently arrived home upset, and cried about her
      peers teasing her.                                             
        Themotherrevealedahistoryofacademicdifficultiesinreadingandspelling.Michele
      had been evaluated by the school psychologist and a phonetic learning disability was
      uncovered. Michele received resource room services during Grades 3 and 4. Her mother
      believed that Michele lacked confidence as a result of embarrassment over her reading
      and spelling difficulties. This past September, Michele was declassified and was no longer
      receiving any special services. Michele had an enmeshed relationship with both of her
      parents. They both responded to her social difficulties by engaging in play activities with
      her to compensate when she was lonely. Because her parents rescued her, Michele had
      fewopportunitiestodevelopsocialskills.AninterviewwithMichele’steacherconfirmed
      all the things Michele reported, and revealed that her peers were reinforced by Michele’s
      behavior. Her classmates enjoyed seeing Michele upset and her immature behavior and
      emotional outbursts reinforced their negative view of her. The teacher felt sorry for
                                                                     
      Michele and gave her extra attention when she became upset.    
        An interview with Michele revealed that she became despondent when she saw the
      newcomer talking to Sangitha. She had automatic thoughts such as, “She will never

=== Page 215 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 201
                                                                     
          be my friend now.” “No one will ever like me.” “There must be something wrong with
          me.” When teased, Michele became noticeably upset and would cry, go to the teacher
                                                                     
          to report how she was teased, or go to her seat and pout. When she encountered her
          tormentors between these torturous events, she either held her head down, so as not to
          make contact, or made nasty remarks to them. Her behavior appeared to keep the cycle
          of strife going. Michele was not good at sharing or making reciprocal arrangements with
          peers. When asked if she knew how to make friends with other girls in the class or how
          to respond to neutralize the fights when teased, she reported that she “had no idea.”
          The psychotherapist pursued the technique of inference chaining and uncovered the
                                                                     
          following core irrational beliefs: “Others should come to me and be my friend.” “I must
          be liked by the other kids, or it means I am no good.” “It’s too hard to make friends and
          I should not have to do it on my own.”                     
            Michele did not play well with other children and was described as selfish. She did
          not share the joystick on electric computer games with peers and always put on the
          TV program that she wanted to watch. When her mother was discussing an example of
          Michele’s failure to share, she burst out, “But they should let me have my way, I shouldn’t
                                                                     
          have to share to have them be my friends.” She also reported thinking, “I can’t stand to
          take turns and should not have to do it.”                  
            A case conceptualization was developed using REBT, behavioral, and systemic prin-
          ciples. Michele had two major problems, coping with teasing by the girls in her class,
          and making and maintaining new friends. Michele was prepared to perceive any indif-
          ference to her, any criticism of her, or any noninvolvement with her as rejection. Such
                                                                     
          activating events elicited the negative thoughts that she would never have any friends
          and was worthless. She felt either anxiety and/or depression. These emotions resulted
          in the behaviors of crying, pouting, and seeking attention and support from adults.
          These behaviors had the cyclical effect of reducing her desirability as a friend to her
          peers. Besides changing these core irrational schemata, Michele needed help in improv-
          ing her inadequate social skills to make friends. Her teacher’s and parents’ attention
          reinforced her cognitive processes, her emotional upset, and the behaviors. Michele’s
                                                                     
          parents’ behaviors also had the effects of preventing her from developing new social
          skills. In addition, Michele had problems with frustration intolerance that interfered
          with her social skills and discouraged children from playing with her.
            Because REBT is a multimodal form of psychotherapy, a comprehensive treatment
          plan was developed that included emotional and practical solutions, and used cognitive,
          behavioral, and systemic interventions. The following nine goals were identified:
                                                                     
                                                                     
            1. Change Mr. and Mrs. M’s emotional response to Michele’s emotional upset from
              guilt and anxiety to concern.

=== Page 216 (1 cols) ===
202   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
         2. Change Mr. and Mrs. M’s behavior from rescuing Michele, and have them
           reinforce prosocial behavior and teach her coping rather than isolation and
           histrionics.                                              
         3. Change Michele’s emotional reaction when she is teased by her peers from
           depression to sadness and coping.                         
         4. Change Michele’s anxiety about making friends to concern.
         5. Teach Michele strategies to cope with the teasing and defuse these events.
         6. Teach Michele social skills to make new friends and maintain the ones she has.
         7. Change the teacher’s behavior from reinforcing emotional upset to reinforcing
           prosocial behavior.                                       
         8. Teach Michele to share, and to make joint decisions and reciprocal arrangements
           with peers.                                               
         9. Increase Michele’s frustration tolerance to allow sharing and reciprocal relation-
           ships with peers.                                         
        The first phase of psychotherapy was to work with Michele’s parents. The psychother-
      apists elicited reports of their behavior toward Michele when she became upset. They
      were asked to consider how their reaction helped Michele learn to cope with the prob-
      lem or how it would help her make friends in the future. They reported that they were
      aware that their behavior was not solving the long-term problem but that they felt so
      upset when she became upset, they thought they had to do something. The psychothera-
      pist identified the goal of changing their emotional reaction to Michele’s problem. Then
      the psychotherapist taught them the B–C connection and engaged them to look for the
      beliefs they had that made them upset. They reported thinking, “It is terrible to watch
      your child experience pain and I must do something to rescue her.” The psychotherapist
      led them in a discussion of this idea and helped them replace it with the rational alter-
      natives, “It is uncomfortable to watch your child have problems; but sometimes children
      have to learn to solve problems even if it is hard.” “Rescuing fails to teach.” “I can only
      teach her that she is strong and can cope by showing her that I believe that she can be
      strong and can cope.” These interventions accomplished Goal 1. They would step up a
      reward system to reinforce Michele for not being upset and discussing her social inter-
      actions calmly, for focusing on how to cope, and for engaging in social activities with
      children in or out of school. They still did not know what to say to Michele about the
      other children teasing her. They and Michele agreed that one or both parents could be
      present in Michele’s sessions. Usually the mother attended and we agreed that the par-
      ent present would discuss the session’s proceedings with the absent parent. This partially
      accomplished Goal 2.                                           
        The next group of sessions focused on Michele and her experiences of being teased.
      The psychotherapist explored the factual nature of Michele’s automatic thoughts.
      She was teased by a number of the most popular girls in her class. The psychotherapist

=== Page 217 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 203
                                                                     
          challenged Michele’s demand that she had to be liked by these girls to be a worthwhile
          person.                                                    
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Psychotherapist: Do these girls like everyone in the class?
          Michele:   Of course not.                                  
          Psychotherapist: You mean there are other girls who are not their friends?
          Michele:   Yes!                                            
          Psychotherapist: Well, what do you think of these other girls who are not friends
                                                                     
                     with the girls club (our term for the band of tormentors)? Are they
                     worthless as well?                              
          Michele:   I never thought of that. Of course they are not worthless!
          Psychotherapist: Well, why not? If you are worthless because you are not their friend,
                     shouldn’t all girls who are not their friend be just as worthless as
                     you?                                            
                                                                     
          Michele:   No, some of them are nice kids.                 
          Psychotherapist: Even though they do not hang around with the girls club?
          Michele:   I guess so.                                     
          Psychotherapist: Can you tell me who these other girls are and what you think is
                     good about them?                                
                     (Michele described the other kids who were not liked by the girls
                                                                     
                     who teased her and what their good qualities were.)
          Psychotherapist: Well, if these other girls can be good even though they are not
                     members of the girls club, why can’t you?       
          Michele:   Well, maybe.                                    
          Therapist: You don’t sound convinced. Maybe you have some good qualities
                     even though you are not a member?               
                                                                     
          Michele:   Well, I never thought about it like that.       
          Psychotherapist: Let’s think about it. Do you have any good traits?
          Michele:   I suppose I do.                                 
          Psychotherapist: What would anyone find that is good about you?
                     (Michele reported on friends she had over the years and why they
                     may have liked her. Her mother reported positive things that other
                     cousins and friends of the family had said about Michele.)
                                                                     
          Psychotherapist: Well, I guess you’re not all bad?         
          Michele:   I guess not, but that does not make them like me.
          Psychotherapist: You are right, but do they have to like everybody?
          Michele:   Of course not, they can’t like everybody. There are only eight of
                     them and there are more girls than that in my class. So I guess they
                     can’t be friends with everyone.

=== Page 218 (1 cols) ===
204   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Psychotherapist: And there are other classes too, and other grades, too. Are all those
                  girls who are not friendly with the club just no good?
      Michele:    I guess not.                                       
      Psychotherapist: Then why are you no good? What makes you different from the
                  other girls that they do not behave friendly with? 
      Michele:    I guess there is no difference. But I just think it about myself, not
                  about the others.                                  
      Psychotherapist: Does that make sense?                         
      Michele:    No.                                                
      Psychotherapist: Why not? Why does it not make sense?          
      Michele:    I am not sure. I just believe it about me, not about them.
      Psychotherapist: Well, if they can be okay even if they are not liked by the girls club,
                  why can’t you?                                     
      Michele:    I never thought about it that way.                 
      Psychotherapist: Well try it. Just say the words out loud. “I am just as good as all
                  the other kids. And I don’t need to be liked by the girls club to be
                  okay!”                                             
      Michele:    I can’t remember all that. (Psychotherapist repeats the statement,
                  and Michele repeats it after three tries.)         
      Psychotherapist: Well, how do you think you would feel if you really thought that
                  way?                                               
      Michele:    I guess I might feel better.                       
      Psychotherapist: Okay, let’s practice getting you to think that way. What can we do
                  to practice it?                                    
        After three sessions of similar dialogue, Michele felt much better about being teased.
      At Session 7, we enlisted her mother to tease her as the girls did and Michele would
      rehearse the coping statement that we had used in the above session. This accomplished
      Goal 3.                                                        
        Once Michele had better control over her depression, the third phase of psychother-
      apy focused on learning new responses to the girls who teased her. Each session, she, her
      mother, and I discussed what the girls had done, continued to analyze her ABCs, and dis-
      cussedwhatshecouldhavesaiddifferentlytothegirls.Weagreedthatshewouldsaynice
      things to them in between upsetting events, such as giving them compliments. When
      they teased her, she would ignore the content of their statements and assertively say, “I
                                                                     
      guess you are still trying to get me upset.” We practiced these responses and had Michele
      role-play them with her mother between sessions. We agreed that each day Michele and
      her mother would review the events of the day and discuss how Michele was using the
      ABCs to keepherselfcalm,whatthe other girlsactuallydidand howMichelecouldhave

=== Page 219 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 205
                                                                     
          responded, and what opportunities Michele could have had to say nice or neutral things
          to the girls. This occurred for 4 weeks. Each session, Michele and her mother reported on
                                                                     
          their meetings, and the psychotherapist reviewed their progress and added information
          when needed. The role here was to be a coach. During this time, the psychotherapist
          also consulted with the teacher to try and ignore emotional outbursts by Michele, and
          reinforce her with praise for coping or giving a prosocial response. After 12 sessions, we
          accomplished most of Goals 2, 3, and 5.                    
            The next series of eight sessions followed the same process but focused on reducing
          Michele’s anxiety over approaching new friends in her class and teaching her what to say
                                                                     
          to make friends. We reviewed the automatic thoughts that occurred when she became
          upset and used inference changing to uncover her irrational beliefs. The psychother-
          apist challenged her irrational beliefs and discussed rational alternatives. We discussed
          homework,whichinvolvedapproachingotherchildren.Mrs.Mcontinuedattendingthe
          sessions and having her daily debriefing sessions with Michele. These sessions accom-
          plished Goals 4, 6, and 7.                                 
            Once Michele had established some emerging friendships, the psychotherapy
                                                                     
          switched focus to Michele’s behavior with peers. The target of the interventions was
          her irrational beliefs that she had to have her way and should not have to share. Again,
          Mrs. M continued attending most sessions with Michele, and continued her daily
          debriefing with Michele. In 10 sessions we made significant progress on improving her
          social skills and accomplished Goal 8. Throughout the last three stages of psychother-
          apy, the parents maintained and adjusted the reinforcement system set up to reward
          prosocial behavior.                                        
                                                                     
            Michele made considerable progress in psychotherapy. She was no longer depressed
          when teased. She handled herself well in social confrontations. She was always a little
          reluctantto make newfriends, but pushed herself.She had new friendsinclass and in her
          neighborhood. She had also developed a new closeness with her mother. She enjoyed
          her debriefing sessions where she got another person’s impressions of her behavior. She
          later transferred this behavior to close friends. Mr. and Mrs. M felt more confident in
          their ability to deal with their daughter, and they were more likely to let her try new
                                                                     
          activities. As of this writing, Michele is a sophomore in high school and has maintained
          all these treatment gains.                                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
          ANNOTATED  BIBLIOGRAPHY                                    
                                                                     
            The Albert Ellis Institute website (http://albertellis.org/) maintains a list of books, DVDs,
            blogs, and audiotapes describing the theory and practice of REBT, video demonstrations of
            actual REBT psychotherapy sessions, a bibliography of the writings of Albert Ellis, treatment
            manuals for specific conditions, and an updated review of research supporting the theory of

=== Page 220 (1 cols) ===
206   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        REBT and its effectiveness and efficacy, and information funding research on REBT. Readers
        can reach the institute by e-mail at info@rebt.org or by phone at 212–535–0822.
          The following annotated references include the most important works in REBT for those
        who want to learn more about the theory and practice of REBT in general and children,
        adolescents, and families in particular.                     
      Bernard, M., & DiGiuseppe, R. (Eds.). (1993). Rational emotive models of consultation in applied
        settings. Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum.                             
          The contributors to this edited work focus on adapting REBT principles to consultation
        activities in schools and educational agencies.              
      Bernard, M. (Ed.). (2013). The strength of self-acceptance. Springer, NY: New York.
          This book focuses on self-acceptance from different theoretical approaches and provides
        guidelines for developing self-acceptance in therapy with specific populations, like parents, or
        children in education settings.                              
      Bernard, M. E. (2004). The REBT therapist’s pocket companion for working with children and adoles-
        cents (p. 245). New York, NY: Albert Ellis Institute.        
          This book provides techniques at hand when working with children and adolescents.
      Bernard, M. E. (2011). Rationality and the pursuit of happiness. The legacy of Albert Ellis (p. 305).
        London, England: Wiley-Blackwell.                            
          This book reveals how Ellis’s principles for rational living can be used in order to achieve
        lifelong happiness.                                          
      Bishop,F.M.(2004).Managingaddictions:Cognitive,emotive,andbehavioraltechniques.Northvale,
        NJ: Aronson.                                                 
          Professionals working with adolescent substance abusers will find this book is useful.
      Borcherdt,B.(1996).Makingfamiliesworkandwhattodowhentheydon’t:Thirtyguidesforimperfect
        parents of imperfect children. New York, NY: Haworth Press.  
          Borcherdt discusses irrational beliefs commonly held by parents and how they lead to inef-
        fectual parenting. This self-help book is valuable for both parents and professionals.
      David, D., Lynn, S., & Ellis, A. (2010). Rational and irrational beliefs: Research, theory, and clinical
        practice. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.             
          This book represents the most comprehensive academic statement on REBT theory and
        research supporting the nature and role of irrational beliefs by Dr. Ellis before his death.
      DiGiuseppe, R. A., Doyle, K. A., Dryden, W., & Backx, W. (2014). A practitioner’s guide to
        rational-emotive behavior therapy (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
          This book is the closest thing to a comprehensive REBT treatment manual.
      Dryden, W., DiGiuseppe, R., & Neenan, M. (2010). A primer on rational emotive behavioral therapy
        (3rd ed.). Champaign, IL: Research Press.                    
          This book provides a basic step-by-step description of the tasks of an REBT psychotherapy
        session.                                                     
      Ellis, A., & Harper, R. (1961). A new guide to rational living. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
          This book is the most popular self-help book written by Albert Ellis and has sold millions
        of copies.

=== Page 221 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 207
                                                                     
          Ellis, A. (1994). Reason and emotional in psychotherapy: A comprehensive method of treating human
            disturbance (rev. and updated). New York, NY: Birch Lane Press.
             This revised edition of Ellis’s first professional book on REBT is a classic and contains a
            detailed discussion of theory and practice.              
                                                                     
          Ellis, A. (2002). Overcoming resistance: A rational emotive behavior therapy integrated approach (2nd
            ed.). New York, NY: Springer.                            
             We think this is Ellis’s best professional book. It provides clinical strategies for dealing with
            difficult clients and with difficult situations in psychotherapy.
          Ellis, A., & Bernard, M. E. (2006). Rational emotive behavioral approaches to childhood disor-
            ders: Theory, practice and research. New York, NY: Springer Science
                                                    +                
                                                      Business Media.
            doi:10.1007/b137389                                      
             ThisbookdiscussesusingREBTwithchildrenandfamilies,andeducatorswithspecificdis-
            orders and problems. It provides discussions of developmental considerations in using REBT
            and reviews the research support for the theory and therapy with children and families.
          Ellis, A., & Dryden, W. (Eds.). (1990). The essential Albert Ellis. New York, NY: Springer.
             This volume contains classic papers by Dr. Ellis.       
          Ellis, A. & Wilde, J. (2002). Case studies in Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy with children and
            adolescents. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.      
             This book provides a number of case studies to demonstrate how REBT is done with chil-
            dren and adolescents. Case examples show practitioners how to use REBT to help young
            people cope with adversities.                            
          Vernon, A. (1998a). The PASSPORT program: A journey through emotional, social, cognitive, and
            self-development, grades 1–5. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
          Vernon, A. (1998b). The PASSPORT program: A journey through emotional, social, cognitive, and
            self-development, grades 6–8. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
          Vernon, A. (1998c). The PASSPORT program: A journey through emotional, social, cognitive, and
            self-development, grades 9–12. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
          Vernon, A. (2009). More what works when. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
             ThesebooksprovideaRationalEmotiveEducationcurriculumcontainingvariouslearning
            activities for use in classrooms and specific activities that can be used in group and individual
            psychotherapy.                                           
             https://itunes.apple.com/ro/app/psypills/id589004229?mt 
                                             =                       
                                             8                       
             PsyPills is an IOS application working on smartphones and tablets for helping adolescents
            and adults manage their stress using REBT-based rational statements.
          REFERENCES                                                 
          American Psychological Association (2012). Recognition of psychotherapy effectiveness. Psy-
            chotherapy, 50, 102–109.                                 
          Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood
            Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

=== Page 222 (1 cols) ===
208   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Barlow, D. H. (1991). Disorders of emotion. Psychological Inquiry, 2(1), 58–71.
      Bartley, W. W. (1987). In defense of self-applied critical rationalism. In G. Radnitzky & W. W.
        Bartley (Eds.), Evolutionary epistemology, theory of rationality and sociology of knowledge (pp.
        279–312). LaSalle, IL: Open Court.                           
      Beck, A. T. (2005). The current state of cognitive therapy: A 40-year retrospective. Archives of
        General Psychiatry, 62(9), 953–959.                          
      Beck, A. T., Freeman, A., Davis, D. & Associates. (2003). Cognitive therapy of personality disorder
        (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.                     
      Bernard, M. E. (1990). Taking the stress out of teaching. North Blackburn, Victoria, Australia:
        Collins/Dove.                                                
      Bernard, M. E. (1995). It’s prime time for REBT: Current theory, practice, research recommen-
        dations, and predictions. Journal of Rational Emotive and Cognitive Behavioral Therapies, 13(1),
        9–27.                                                        
      Bernard, M. E. (Ed.). (2013). The strength of self-acceptance: Theory, practice and research (pp.
        155–192). New York, NY: Springer Science                     
                                  +                                  
                                    Business Media. doi:10.1007/978–1-4614–
        6806–6_10                                                    
      Bernard, M. E., & DiGiuseppe, R. (1990). Rational emotive therapy and school psychology.
        School Psychology Review, 19(3), 267.                        
      Bernard, M. E., & DiGiuseppe, R. (Eds.). (1993). Rational emotive models of consultation in applied
        settings. Hillside, NJ: Erlbaum.                             
      Bernard, M. E., Ellis, A., & Terjesen, M. (2006). Rational emotive approaches to childhood
        disorders: History, theory, practice and research. In A. Ellis & M. E. Bernard (Eds.), Rational
        emotive behavioral approaches to childhood disorders (pp. 3–84). New York, NY: Springer.
      Bernard, M. E., & Joyce, M. (1993). Rational emotive therapy with children and adolescents.
        New York, NY: Wiley.                                         
      Bernard, M. E., Vernon, A., Terjesen, M., & Kurasaki, R. (2013). Self-acceptance in the educa-
        tion and counseling of young people. In M. E. Bernard (Ed.), The strength of self-acceptance:
        Theory, practice and research (pp. 155–192). New York, NY: Springer Science
                                                     +               
                                                       Business      
        Media. doi:10.1007/978–1-4614–6806–6_10                      
      Bora, C., Vernon, A., & Trip, S. (2013). Effectiveness of a rational emotive behavior education
        programinreducingteachers’emotionaldistress.JournalofCognitiveandBehavioralPsychother-
        apies, 13(2A), 585–604.                                      
      Burgess,P.M.(1990).Towardresolutionofconceptualissuesintheassessmentofbeliefsystemsin
        rational-emotive therapy. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy: An International Quarterly, 4(2),
        171–184.                                                     
      Campbell, L. F., Norcross, J. C., Vasquez, M. T., & Kaslow, N. J. (2013). Recognition of psy-
        chotherapy effectiveness: The APA resolution. Psychotherapy, 50(1), 98–101. doi:10.1037/
        a0031817                                                     
      Casey, R. J., & Berman, J. S. (1985). The outcome of psychotherapy with children. Psychological
        Bulletin, 98, 388–400.                                       
      Clark, L. (1996). SOS Help for Parents. A practical guide for handling common everyday behavior
        problems. Bowling Green, OH: Parents Press & SOS Programs.

=== Page 223 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 209
                                                                     
          Dadds, M. R., & McHugh, T. A. (1992). Social support and treatment outcome in behavioral
            family therapy for child conduct problems. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60,
            252–259.                                                 
                                                                     
          Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of the emotions in man and animals. London, England: John
            Murray.                                                  
          David, D. (Ed.). (2010). RETmagic and the wonderful adventures of RETMAN [RETmagia ¸si min-
            unatele aventuri ale lui RETMAN]. Cluj Napoca, Romania: RTS Cluj.
          David, D. (Ed.). (2013). RETMAN and the RETmagic. Therapeutic cartoons [RETMAN si RET-
            magia Desene animate terapeutice]. Cluj-Napoca, Romania: Cluj University Press.
          David, D., Lynn, S., & Ellis, A. (2010). Rational and irrational beliefs: Research, theory, and clinical
            practice. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.         
          David, D., Schnur, J., & Belloiu, A. (2002). Another search for the “hot” cognitions: Appraisal,
            irrational beliefs, attributions, and their relation to emotion. Journal of Rational–Emotive and
            Cognitive–Behavior Therapy, 20(2), 93–131.               
                                                                     
          David, O. A. (2014). The rational positive parenting program for child externalizing behavior:
            Mechanisms of change analysis. Journal of Evidence-Based Psychotherapies, 14(1), 21–38.
          David, O. A., & David, D. (2013, July). State efficacy of CBT delivered by a new robot (RET-
            MAN) promoting emotional resilience in children. Paper presented at the symposium Devel-
            opments in Technology and Clinical Cognitive Science: The “4th wave” in CBT? Seventh
            World Congress of Cognitive and Behavioural Therapies, Lima, Peru.
          David,O.A.,David,D.,&DiGiuseppe,R.(2014).Youaresuchabadchild!Appraisalsasmecha-
            nisms of parental negative and positive affect. Journal of General Psychology, 141(2), 113–129.
          David, O. A., Matu, S. A., Pintea, S., Cotet, C. D., & Nagy, D. (2014). Cognitive-behavioral
            processes based on using the ABC analysis by trainees for their personal development. Journal
                                                                     
            of Rational–Emotive and Cognitive–Behavior Therapy. doi:10.1007/s10942–014–0189–0
          David, O. A., & Podina, I. (in press). Positive attentional bias as a resilience factor in parenting.
            Implications for attention bias modification online parenting interventions. Proceedings of the
            2nd World Congress on resilience: From person to society, Timisoara, Romania.
          DiGiuseppe,R.(1977).Usingbehaviormodificationtoteachrationalself-statementstochildren.
            InA.Ellis&R.Grieger(Eds.),Rationalemotivepsychotherapy:Ahandbookoftheoryandpractice.
            New York, NY: Springer.                                  
          DiGiuseppe, R. (1988). A cognitive behavioral approach to the treatment of conduct disorder
            children and adolescents. In N. Epstein, S. Schlesinger, & W. Dryden (Eds.), Cognitive behav-
            ioral therapy with families (pp. 183–214). New York, NY: Brunner/Mazel.
          DiGiuseppe, R. (1989). Cognitive therapy with children. In A. Freeman, K. Simon, L. Buetler,
                                                                     
            & H. Arkowitz (Eds.), Comprehensive handbook of cognitive therapy. New York, NY: Plenum
            Press.                                                   
          DiGiuseppe, R. (1994). Rational emotive therapy with depressed children. In J. LeCroy (Ed.),
            Handbook of child and adolescent treatment manuals. New York, NY: Plenum Press.
          DiGiuseppe, R. (1996). The nature of irrational beliefs: Progress in rational emotive behavior
            therapy. Journal of Rational Emotive & Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 14(1), 5–28.

=== Page 224 (1 cols) ===
210   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      DiGiuseppe, R. (2011). Reflection on My 32 Years with Albert Ellis. Journal of Rational-Emotive
        & Cognitive-Behavior Therapy, 29, 220–227. doi:10.1007/s10942–010–0118–9
      DiGiuseppe,R.,&Bernard,M.E.(2006).Principlesofassessmentandmethodsoftreatmentwith
        children. In A. Ellis & M. E. Bernard (Eds.), Rational emotive approaches to childhood disorders
        (pp. 85–114). New York, NY: Springer.                        
      DiGiuseppe, R., & Jilton, R. (1996). The therapeutic alliance in adolescent psychotherapy.
        Applied and Preventive Psychology, 5, 85–100.                
      DiGiuseppe, R., & Kelter, J. (2006). Treating aggressive children: A rational emotive behavior
        systems approach. In A. Ellis & M. E. Bernard (Eds.), Rational emotive behavioral approaches to
        childhood disorders (pp. 257–281). New York, NY: Springer.   
      DiGiuseppe, R., & Leaf, R. (1993). The therapeutic relationship in rational emotive therapy.
        Journal of Rational Emotive and Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 11(4), 223–234.
      DiGiuseppe,R.,Miller,N.J.,&Trexler,L.D.(1977).Areviewofrationalemotivepsychotherapy
        outcome studies. The Counseling Psychologist, 7, 64–72.      
      DiGiuseppe, R., Robin, M., & Dryden, W. (1991). Rational emotive therapy and the
        Judeo-Christianphilosophy:Complimentaryclinicalstrategies.JournalofCognitivePsychother-
        apies: An International Quarterly, 4(4), 355–368.            
      DiGiuseppe, R., & Tafrate, R. C. (2007). Understanding anger disorders. New York, NY: Oxford
        University Press.                                            
      Dix, T. (1991). The affective organization of parenting: Adaptive and maladaptive processes.
        Psychological Bulletin, 110(1), 3–25.                        
      Doyle, K. A., & Terjesen, M. (2006). Rational-emotive behavior therapy and attention deficit
        disorder. In A. Ellis & M. E. Bernard (Eds.), Rational emotive behavioral approaches to childhood
        disorders (pp. 281–309). New York, NY: Springer.             
      Dryden, W. (2009). Rational emotive behaviour therapy: Distinctive features. Hove, East Sussex,
        England: Routledge.                                          
      Dryden, W., DiGiuseppe, R., & Neenan, M. (2010). A primer on rational emotive behavioral therapy
        (3rd ed.). Champaign, IL: Research Press.                    
      Ellis, A. (1959). Requisite conditions for basic personality change. Journal of Consulting Psychol-
        ogy, 23, 538–540.                                            
      Ellis, A. (1977). Skills training in counseling and psychotherapy. Canadian Counselor, 12(1),
        30–35.                                                       
      Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. Secaucus, NJ: Lyle Stuart.
      Ellis, A. (1994). Reason and emotional in psychotherapy: A comprehensive method of treating human
        disturbance (rev. and updated). New York, NY: Birch Lane Press.
      Ellis,A.(1996).ResponsestocriticismsofrationalemotivebehaviortherapybyRayDiGiuseppe,
        Frank Boyd, Windy Dryden, Steven Weinrach, and Richard Wessler. Journal of Rational Emo-
        tive & Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 14(2), 97–122.            
      Ellis, A. (2001). A history of the behavioral therapies: Founders’ personal histories. In W. T.
        O’Donohue, D. A. Henderson, S. C. Hayes, J. E. Fisher, & L. J. Hayes (Eds.), The rise of
        cognitive behavior therapy (pp. 183–194). Reno, NV: Context Press.

=== Page 225 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 211
                                                                     
          Ellis, A. (2003a). Discomfort anxiety: A new cognitive-behavioral construct (Part I). Journal of
            Rational-Emotive & Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 21(3), 183–191.
          Ellis, A. (2003b). Discomfort anxiety: A new cognitive-behavioral construct (Part II). Journal of
            Rational-Emotive & Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 21(3), 193–202.
                                                                     
          Ellis,A.(2004).Whyrationalemotivebehavior therapyisthemostcomprehensive andeffective
            form of behavior therapy. Journal of Rational-Emotive & Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 22(2),
            85–92.                                                   
          Ellis, A, (2005a). Why I (really) became a psychotherapist. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 61(8),
            945–948.                                                 
          Ellis,A.(2005b).DiscussionofChristineA.PadeskyandAaronT.Beck,Scienceandphilosophy:
            Comparison of cognitive therapy and rational emotive behavior therapy. Journal of Cognitive
            Psychotherapy, 19(2), 181–185.                           
          Ellis, A. (2005c). The myth of self-esteem: How rational emotive behavior therapy can change your life
            forever. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.                  
          Ellis, A., & DiGiuseppe, R. (1993). Appropriate and inappropriate emotions in rational emotive
            therapy: A response to Cramer & Fong. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 17(5), 471–477.
          Ellis, A., & Dryden, W. (1997). The practice of rational emotive therapy (2nd ed.). New York, NY:
            Springer.                                                
          Ellis,A.,Wolfe,J.,&Moseley,S.(1966).Howtoraiseanemotionallyhealthy,happychild.NewYork,
                                                                     
            NY: Crown.                                               
          Engels, G. I., Garnefski, N., & Diekstra, R.F.W. (1993). Efficacy of rational emotive therapy: A
            quantitative analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 1083–1090.
          Esposito, M. A. (2009). REBT with children and adolescents: A meta-analytic review of efficacy
            studies. Dissertation Abstracts International, 70(5-B), 3195.
          Ford,P.W.(2009).Effectofmethodological improvements andstudyqualityonREBTtreatment
            outcome research since 1990: A meta-analysis. Dissertation Abstracts International, 69(12-B),
            7809.                                                    
          Gavita, O. A. (2011). Evidence-based parent programs for child disruptive behavior disorders. Köln,
            Germany: LAP LAMBERT Academic.                           
          Gavita, O. A., & C˘ alin, A. (2013). RETMAN rational stories versus rational parenting pro-
            gram for the treatment of child psychopathology: Efficacy of two formats of rational-emotive
            behavior therapy. Journal of Cognitive and Behavioral Psychotherapies, 13(1), 33–52.
          Gavita, O. A.,David, D.,Bujoreanu, S., Tiba, A., &Ionu¸tiu, D. R. (2012). The efficacy of a short
            cognitive-behavioral parent program in the treatment of externalizing behavior disorders in
                                                                     
            Romanian foster care children: Building parental emotion-regulation through unconditional
            self- and child-acceptance strategies. Children and Youth Services Review, 34(2), 1290–1297.
          Gavita, O. A., DiGiuseppe, R., & David, D. (2013). Self-acceptance and raising children:
            The case of parental unconditional acceptance. In M. E. Bernard (Ed.), The strength of
            self-acceptance. New York, NY: Springer.                 
          Gonzalez, J. E., Nelson, J. R., Gutkin, T. B., Saunders, A., Galloway, A., & Shwery, C. S. (2004).
            Rational emotive therapy with children and adolescents: a meta-analysis. Journal of Emotional
            and Behavioral Disorders 2004, 12(4), 222–235.

=== Page 226 (1 cols) ===
212   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Gossette, R. L., & O’Brien, R. M. (1992). The efficacy of rational emotive therapy in adults:
        Clinical fact or psychometric artifact. Journal of Behavior Therapy & Experimental Psychiatry,
        23, 9–24.                                                    
      Gossette, R. L., & O’Brien, R. M. (1993). Efficacy of rational emotive therapy with children: A
        critical re-appraisal. Journal of Behavior Therapy & Experimental Psychiatry, 24, 15–25.
      Gotterbarn, R. C. (1990). The relationship of age, intelligence, and social-emotional adjust-
        ment to children’s ability to differentiate thoughts from mental states. Dissertation Abstracts
        International (Vol. 51[5-B], pp. 2620).                      
      Grave, J., & Blissett, J. (2004). Is cognitive behavior therapy developmentally appropriate for
        young children? A critical review. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 399–420.
      Graves, D. (1996). The effect of rational emotive parent education on the stress of mothers of young
        children with Downs syndrome. Dissertation, University of Melbourne, Australia.
      Griger, R. M., & Boyd, J. D. (1989). Rational emotive approaches. In D. T. Brown & H. T. Prout
        (Eds.), Counseling and psychotherapy with children and adolescents: Theory and practice in school
        and clinical settings (2nd ed., pp. 303–362). Brandon, VT: Clinical Psychology.
      Haaga, D. A., & Davison, G. C. (1989). Outcome studies of rational emotive therapy. In M. E.
        Bernard & R. DiGiuseppe (Eds.), Inside rational emotive therapy: A critical appraisal of the theory
        and therapy of Albert Ellis (pp. 155–197). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
      Hajzler, D. J., & Bernard, M. E. (1990). A review of rational emotive education outcome studies.
        School Psychology Quarterly, 6, 27–49.                       
      Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and commitment therapy: An
        experiential approach to behavior change. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
      Huber, C. H., & Baruth, L. G. (1989). Rational emotive systems family therapy. New York, NY:
        Springer.                                                    
      Jacobson, N. (1992). Behavioral couples therapy: A new beginning. Behavior Therapy, 23,
        491–506.                                                     
      James, W. (1890/1950). The principles of psychology, 2 vols. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications
      Johnson, B., Devries, R., Ridley, C., Pettorini, D., & Peterson, D. (1994). The comparative effi-
        cacy of Christian and secular RET with Christian clients. Journal of Psychology and Theology,
        22(2), 130–140.                                              
      Johnson, B., & Ridley, C. R. (1992). Brief Christian and non-Christian RET with depressed
        Christian clients: An exploratory study. Counseling and Values, 36, 220–229.
      Jorm, A. F. (1989). Modifiability of trait anxiety and neuroticism: A meta-analysis of the litera-
        ture. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 23, 21–29.
      Joyce, M. R. (1995). Emotional relief for parents: Is rational-emotive parent education effective?
        Journal of Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy, 13(1), 55–75.  
      Joyce, M. (2006). A developmental, rational-emotive behavior therapy approach for working
        with parents. In A. Ellis & M. E. Bernard (Eds.), Rational emotive approaches to childhood disor-
        ders (pp. 177–211). New York, NY: Springer.                  
      Kazdin, A. E., & Weisz, J. R. (2010). Introduction: Context, background, and goals. In J. R.
        Weisz&A.E.Kazdin(Eds.),Evidence-basedpsychotherapiesforchildrenandadolescents(2nded.,
        pp. 3–9). New York, NY: Guilford Press.

=== Page 227 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 213
                                                                     
          Kelly, G. (1955). The psychology of personal constructs (Vol. 1). New York, NY: Norton.
          Kendall, P. C., Haaga, D.A.F., Ellis, A., Bernard, M. E., DiGiuseppe, R. A., & Kassinove, H.
            (1995). Rational emotive therapy in the 1990’s and beyond: Current status, recent revisions,
            and research questions. Clinical Psychology Review, 15(3), 169–185.
                                                                     
          Knaus, W. (1974). Rational emotive education. New York, NY: Institute for Rational Living.
          Kopec, A. M., Beal, D., & DiGiuseppe, R. (1994). Training in rational emotive therapy: Dispu-
            tation strategies. Journal of Rational Emotive and Cognitive Behavior Therapies, 12(2).
          Kuhn, T. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
          Lyons, L. C., & Woods, P. J. (1991). The efficacy of rational emotive therapy: A quantitative
            review of the outcome research. Clinical Psychology Review, 11, 357–369.
          Lundahl, B., Risser, H. J., & Lovejoy, M. C. (2006). A meta-analysis of parent training: Moder-
            ators and follow-up effects. Clinical Psychology Review, 26(1), 86–104.
          Mahoney,M.(1974).Cognitionandbehaviorandbehaviormodification.Cambridge,MA:Ballinger.
          Mahoney, M. (1991). Human change processes: The scientific foundations of psychotherapy. New
            York, NY: Basic Books.                                   
          Maultsby,M.C.(1975).Helpyourselftohappinessthroughrationalself-counseling.Oxford,England:
            Herman.                                                  
          McGovern, T. E., & Silverman, M. S. (1984). A review of outcome studies of rational emotive
            therapy from 1977 to 1982. Journal of Rational Emotive Therapy, 2(1), 7–18.
                                                                     
          Meichenbaum, D. (1993). Changing conceptions of cognitive behavior modification: Retrospec-
            tive and prospective. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61(2), 202–204.
          Merriefield, C., & Merriefield, R. (1979). Call me RET-man and have a ball. New York, NY: Insti-
            tute for Rational Living.                                
          Mersch, P. P., Emmelkamp, P. M., Bogels, S. M., & Van der Sleen, J. (1989). Social phobia: Indi-
            vidual response patterns and the effects of behavioral and cognitive interventions. Behaviour
            Research and Therapy, 27(4), 421–434.                    
          Mersch, P. P., Emmelkamp, P. M., & Lipps, C. (1991). Social phobia: Individual response pat-
            terns and the long term effects of behavioral and cognitive interventions: A follow up study.
            Behavior Research and Therapy, 29(4), 357–362.           
          Mersch, P. P., Hildebrand, M., Lavy, E. H., Wessel, I., & van de Hout, W. J. (1992).
            Somatic symptoms in social phobia: A treatment method based on rational emotive therapy
            and paradoxical interventions. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 23,
            199–211.                                                 
          Miller, N. J., & Kassinove, H. (1978). Effects of lecture, rehearsal, written homework, and the
                                                                     
            IQ on the efficacy of a rational emotive school mental health program. Journal of Community
            Psychology, 6, 366–373.                                  
          Miller, W., & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people to change addictive
            behavior (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.        
          Neimeyer, R. (1993). An appraisal of constructivist psychotherapies. Journal of Consulting and
            Clinical Psychology, 61(2), 221–234.                     
          Nezu, A. M., Maguth Nezu, C., & D’Zurilla, T. J. (2013). Problem-solving therapy: A treatment
            manual. New York, NY: Springer.

=== Page 228 (1 cols) ===
214   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Nielsen, S., Johnson, W., & Ellis, A. (2001). Counseling and psychotherapy with religious persons:
        A rational emotive behavior therapy approach. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Pub-
        lishers.                                                     
      Norcross, J. C., Krebs, P. M., & Prochaska, J. O. (2011). Stages of change. Journal of Clinical
        Psychology, 67(2), 143–154. doi:10.1002/jclp.20758           
      Oei, T.P.S., Hansen, J., & Miller, S. (1993). The empirical status of irrational beliefs in rational
        emotive therapy. Australian Psychologist, 28, 195–200.       
      Piaget, J. (1963). The origins of intelligence in children. New York, NY: Norton.
      Polder, S. K. (1986). A meta-analysis of cognitive behavior therapy. Dissertation Abstracts Interna-
        tional, B47, 1736.                                           
      Popper, K. (1962). Conjecture and refutation. New York, NY: Harper.
      Rogers, C. (1957). The necessary and sufficient conditions of therapeutic personality change.
        Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21, 95–103.                
      Rorer, L. (1989). Rational emotive theory: II. Explication and evaluation. Cognitive Therapy and
        Research, 13, 531–548.                                       
      Ruggiero, G. M., Ammendola, E., Caselli, G., & Sassaroli, S. (2014). REBT in Italy: Dissemi-
        nation and integration with constructivism and metacognition. Journal of Rational-Emotive &
        Cognitive-Behavior Therapy. doi:10.1007/s10942–013–0177–9    
      Sapp, M. (1994). Cognitive behavioral counseling: Applications for African American
        middle-school students who are academically at risk. Journal of Instructional Psychology, 21(2),
        161–171.                                                     
      Sapp, M. (1996). Irrational beliefs that can lead to academic failure for African American
        middle-school students who are at-risk. Journal of Rational Emotive & Cognitive Behavior Ther-
        apy, 14(2), 123–134.                                         
      Sapp, M., & Farrell, W. (1994). Cognitive behavioral interventions: Applications for academi-
        cally at risk special education students. Preventing School Failure, 38(2), 19–24.
      Sapp,M.,Farrell,W.,&Durand,H.(1995).Cognitivebehaviortherapy:ApplicationsforAfrican
        American middle-school at risk students. Journal of Instructional Psychology, 22(2), 169–177.
      Seligman, M.E.P. (1991). Learned optimism. New York, NY: Knopf.
      Sherwood, V. (1990). The first stage of treatment with the conduct disordered adolescent: Over-
        coming narcissistic resistance. Psychotherapy, 27, 380–387.  
      Silverman, M. S., McCarthy, M., & McGovern, T. (1992). A review of outcome studies of
        rational emotive therapy from 1982–1989. Journal of Rational Emotive & Cognitive-Behavior
        Therapy, 10, 11–175.                                         
      Smith, M. L., & Glass, G. V. (1977). Meta-analysis of psychotherapy outcome studies. American
        Psychologist, 32, 752–760.                                   
      Smith, C. A., Haynes, K. N., Lazarus, R. S., & Pope, L. K. (1993). In search of the “hot” cogni-
        tions: Attributions, appraisals, and their relation to emotion. Journal of Personality and Social
        Psychology, 65(5), 916–929.                                  
      Trip, S., Vernon, A., & McMahon, J. (2007). Effectiveness of rational-emotive education. A
        quantitative meta-analytical study. Journal of Cognitive and Behavioral Psychotherapies, 7(1),
        81–94.

=== Page 229 (1 cols) ===
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy 215
                                                                     
          Vernon, A. (1998a). The PASSPORT program: A journey through emotional, social, cognitive, and
            self-development, grades 1–5. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
          Vernon, A. (1998b). The PASSPORT program: A journey through emotional, social, cognitive, and
            self-development, grades 6–8. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
                                                                     
          Vernon, A. (1998c). The PASSPORT program: A journey through emotional, social, cognitive, and
            self-development, grades 9–12. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
          Vernon,A.(2007).Applicationofrationalemotivebehaviortherapytogroupswithinclassrooms
            and educational settings. In R. W. Christner, J. L. Stewart, & A. Freeman (Eds.), Handbook
            of cognitive-behavior group therapy with children and adolescents: Specific settings and presenting
            problems (pp. 107–127). New York, NY: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.
          Waters, V. (1980). Rational stories for children. New York, NY: Albert Ellis Institute.
          Weisz, J. R., Weiss, B., Alicke, M. D., & Klotz, M. L. (1987). Effectiveness of psychotherapy
            with children and adolescents: Meta-analytic findings for clinicians. Journal of Consulting and
            Clinical Psychology, 55, 542–549.                        
          Wolpe, J. (1990). The practice of behavior therapy. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
          Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Thinking and feeling: Preferences need no inferences. American Psycholo-
            gist, 35, 151–175.                                       
          Zettle, R., & Hayes, S. (1980). Conceptual and empirical status of rational emotive therapy.
                                                                     
            Progress in Behavior Modification, 9, 125–166.

=== Page 230 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 231 (1 cols) ===
CHAPTER                             
                                   7                                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                Reality    Therapy      Approaches                   
                                                                     
                                                                     
                              G                                      
                                ERALD                                
                                    B. F                             
                                      ULLER                          
                                                                     
                                                                     
          R  eality therapy was developed by William Glasser (1965, 1972, 1976a, 1976b, 1981,
             1998, 2000, 2011) when he recognized that existing therapeutic systems did not
          produce rapid and durable change. The essence of reality therapy is the acceptance of
          responsibility by individuals for their own behavior, thus helping them to achieve suc-
                                                                     
          cess and happiness. Concomitant with this responsibility is the importance of personal
          involvement in all the therapeutic and growth processes. Reality therapy teaches better
          ways of fulfilling needs. It stresses the idea that, given an atmosphere of human involve-
          ment and supportive confrontation, an individual can learn how to behave in a more
          responsible and productive manner.                         
                                                                     
                                                                     
          HISTORY AND STATUS                                         
                                                                     
          W.Glasser,inconjunctionwithG.L.Harrington,beganthedevelopmentofrealityther-
          apy in 1962 while working at a Veterans Administration hospital in California. During
          this same period he was the chief psychiatrist at the Ventura School for Girls, which
          housed 14- to 16-year-old females who had been labeled as incorrigibles. Here the prin-
          ciples of reality therapy were used in developing specific programs for the girls and for the
                                                                     
          schoolasawhole.Theseyoungwomenhad,understandably,poorself-esteem,andoneof
          Glasser’s immediate goals was to build success into their experiences. The school became
          a place where honest praise was given freely. The girls were put in charge of themselves,
          thus giving them the responsibility for their own behavior. Rules were clearly defined,
          as were the consequences for breaking them. The praise and personal responsibility
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                   217

=== Page 232 (1 cols) ===
218   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      helped shift the girls’ attention away from the authority figures against whom they had
      rebelled.                                                      
        The title reality therapy was officially introduced in an article dealing with juve-
      nile delinquency (W. Glasser, 1964). The following year, his book Reality Therapy
      (W. Glasser, 1965) appeared. At approximately the same time, Glasser founded the
      Institute for Reality Therapy. Here therapists do both individual and group counseling
      and teach the concepts of reality therapy to both laypersons and professionals.
        In 1966, Glasser began consulting in the California school system. His experience in
      the schools led to the publication of Schools without Failure (W. Glasser, 1969) in which
      he applied the concepts of reality therapy to contemporary education. He described the
      inadequaciesofcurrenteducationalproceduresandsuggestedtechniquesaimedatreduc-
      ing school failure. Again, these techniques were aimed at the children’s involvement in
      their schooling, giving them a sense of self-esteem and a successful identity. He felt this
      whole process could best be accomplished by making education interesting and relevant,
      by retiring the grading system, by showing true concern, and by allowing the children
      to progress at their own speed. A good classroom, he asserted, should incorporate praise,
      active listening, and relevant helpfulness.                    
        In 1969, as a result of the popularity of Schools without Failure, the Educator Training
      Center (ETC) was opened to handle the flood of requests for information and teach-
      ing materials. By offering materials such as films, cassettes, and books that emphasized
      the principles of reality therapy, the center helped teachers and other school personnel
      create schools without failure. So many children who appeared to have had adequate
      advantages (e.g., comfortable homes, security, and attention) were responding by failing
      in school, using drugs, and demonstrating an unwillingness to work for reasonable goals.
      Glasser’s search for an explanation for this phenomenon led to his concept of role versus
      goal. This theory was the impetus for The Identity Society (W. Glasser, 1972). Here he dis-
      cussed the replacement of a survival society where behavior is directed toward keeping
      people fed, clothed, and comfortable, by an Identity Society, where emphasis is placed
      on caring, involvement, respect, and satisfaction. Children gain strength and success-
      ful identities through involvement with others, and with these strength children can
      do what is necessary to reap the benefits available in the identity society. Glasser pro-
      posed that a person, in looking for ways to gain personal strength or confidence, could
      become addicted to positive behavior. These positive addictions—the antithesis of neg-
      ative addictions such as drugs and alcohol, which make one weaker—help to make one
      stronger. Jogging, tennis, or reading could thus become positively addictive. These ideas
      were set forth in Positive Addiction (W. Glasser, 1976b).      
        In an attempt to fill the gap that often exists between theory and practice, a case
      study compilation entitled What Are You Doing? How People Are Helped through Reality
      Therapy was edited by N. Glasser (1980). A solid neurological and psychological base

=== Page 233 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 219
                                                                     
          was added to the clinical approach of reality therapy with the publication of Stations of
          the Mind (W. Glasser, 1981). Its thesis is that people are internally motivated and, thus,
                                                                     
          behavior is purposeful. Each individual may perceive a different reality, however, and
          this idea must be kept in mind when interpreting other’s behaviors. What is motivating
          a particular child and what others think is motivating him or her may be very different
          indeed.                                                    
            In Take Effective Control of Your Life(W. Glasser, 1984), Glasser describes his new con-
          trol theory, which proposed that people can better their lives through conscious control
          oftheiremotionsandactions.Thiswasbasedonhistheorythateverythingapersondoes,
                                                                     
          thinks, and feels comes from inside an individual and is not, as most people believe, a
          response to external circumstances.                        
            In his next book, Control Theory in the Classroom (W. Glasser, 1986a), Glasser
          addressed the need for schools to restructure the classroom environment to keep
          students interested and involved in learning. He contends that students are currently
          not successful in school because school was not part of the picture in their heads that
                                                                     
          fulfilled their basic needs. Glasser proposed the use of a cooperative learning approach
          that would satisfy students’ basic needs for fun, belonging, power, and freedom. Thus,
          students would be provided with mental pictures of learning in school that would be
          need fulfilling.                                           
            Todemonstratetheroleofcontroltheoryinthepracticeofrealitytherapy,acasestudy
          book titled Control Theory in the Practice of Reality Therapy: Case Studies was edited by
          N. Glasser (1989). These case studies provide interesting examples of ways that control
                                                                     
          theory can be translated into the practice of reality therapy.
            W. Glasser (1990) in The Quality School: Managing Students without Coercion con-
          tinued his thinking about schools by combining the work of Edward Deming with his
          own experience with education and control theory. He presented an effective manage-
          ment style for school based on many years of research. Glasser suggested that traditional
          management was the problem in school because it has turned students and staff into
          adversaries. He proposed a system that brings them together to produce quality school-
                                                                     
          work and quality teaching. Control theory was expanded by W. Glasser (1993) in The
          Quality School Teacher. He explained how a working knowledge of control theory can
          improve the relationship between teacher and student. Specific guidelines were given
          for teachers as they help their students achieve better. This was followed by The Control
          Theory Manager (W. Glasser, 1994), which provided insight to management on con-
          trol theory, and discusses how focusing on leadership and rejecting coercion produce
                                                                     
          quality. His next book, Staying Together: A Control Theory Guide to Lasting Relationships
          (W. Glasser, 1996) provided substantial examination of intimate relationships, focusing
          on what characteristics make them last. While speaking in Australia in 1996, Glasser
          announced that he was going to start referring to what had previously been control

=== Page 234 (1 cols) ===
220   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      theory, as choice theory, and in 1998 published Choice Theory: A New Psychology of Per-
      sonal Freedom (W. Glasser, 1998). Choice theory was really the mental health concept
      added to his reality therapy. It was the theory that supported reality therapy. The whole
      premise of choice theory was the idea that a person’s actions are always within the per-
      son’s control. He saw choice theory as an internal control psychology and the alternative
      to external control psychology.                                
        In his latest book, Reality Therapy in Action (W. Glasser, 2000), he presents his new
      theory with the major part being case study examples. In the book he focuses on unsat-
      isfying relationships as the main thrust in therapy. Relationships are now central to his
      approach to therapy, and it is much more important to help the client to fix this than
      talk at length about the symptoms of the problem.              
        Inhislatestbook,TakeChargeofYourLife:HowtoGetWhatYouNeedwithChoiceThe-
      ory Psychology (W. Glasser, 2011), he explained choice theory that allows individuals to
      learn how to improve their relationships and take charge of their actions. In one chapter
      of the book he explained how to apply choice theory psychology in raising children.
        The Institute for Reality Therapy teaches the practice and concepts of reality ther-
      apy to professional people, interested groups, and organizations. Individuals are taught
      in 1-week sessions that include lectures, discussions, demonstrations, and role-playing
      situations. To become certified as a reality therapist one must complete a 1-week basic
      intensive seminar followed by a supervised practicum, which is arranged, a second inten-
      sive week, followed by a second practicum. The title Reality Therapy Certified (RTC) is
      given to individuals completing this 18-month program. The Institute is now called the
      William Glasser Institute.                                     
        The Journal of Reality Therapy was first published in the fall of 1981. This semiannual
      publication focuses on theoretical, a few research-based, and specific descriptions of the
      successful applications of reality therapy principles in field settings. An edited book by
      Litwack (1994) contains a selection of articles from the first 13 years of the Journal of
      Reality Therapy. The articles present an overview of the development of the concepts
      and practice of reality therapy. In 1997 the name of the journal was changed to the
      International Journal of Reality Therapy. In 2011, the name of the journal was changed
      again to the International Journal of Choice Theory and Reality Therapy. The majority of
      the articles are still without experimental and research-based evidence.
                                                                     
      OVERVIEW  OF THEORY                                            
                                                                     
      The following section presents the basic theory and assumptions of reality therapy. This
      includes the four basic needs children need to fulfill to acquire the feeling that they are
      basically successful and how these needs affect their relationship with others. How this
      works is explained through control and choice theory.

=== Page 235 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 221
                                                                     
          Basic Theory and Assumptions                               
                                                                     
          Reality therapy purports that the driving force for all behavior is the basic, intrinsic goal
          of having a different, distinct, and unique identity. Each child wants to believe there is
          no other person quite like him or her anywhere on earth. To attain and maintain this
          identity, regardless of whether it is centered on success or failure, is critical.
            Failure-identity children are those who believe “I can’t do it. I’m no good. I’m not
                                                                     
          successful. I’m worthless.” Believing they have little chance to succeed or to be happy,
          thesechildrenappeartohaveadistressingornegativeattitudetowardschoolandlife.For
          them, the real world is uncomfortable. These children have given up and, for the most
          part, have resigned themselves to failure. They often see themselves as losers and lonely
          and do not care about themselves or others. They are self-critical, irrational, and irre-
          sponsible and have little to look forward to. Apathetic, indifferent, uninvolved, and uncon-
          cerned are some of the terms that are used to describe these children. School failure is
                                                                     
          personalized and so these children come to view themselves as worthless.
            For children to acquire the feeling that they are basically successful or good, they must
          fulfill the following general or basic needs:              
                                                                     
            • Love: Belonging, friendship, caring, and involvement.  
            • Power: Importance, recognition, worth, and skill.      
            • Fun: Pleasure, enjoyment, laughter, and learning.      
            • Freedom: Independence, choice, and autonomy.           
                                                                     
                                                                     
            All people need to be loved and cared for from birth to old age; this includes groups as
          well as families. To love and be loved are necessary ingredients for successful growth and
          development. The child must learn both to give love and to receive it in return. This
          necessitates that there must be at least one person who cares for the child and for whom
          the child cares. Children’s need for love and belonging can be seen in the interaction
          with the members of their family and with others in school. In school, this might be
                                                                     
          reflected in social responsibility. Children must learn to care for, to be responsible for,
          and to help one another. To the extent that the child becomes involved with others, the
          child who belongs or is involved is more successful than the uninvolved child who may
          well be lonely and suffering.                              
            In addition to love, children also need power or a sense of importance. There are ways
          to satisfy this need for power that are positive and do not interfere with other people’s
          needs. One positive way to meet the need for power is to receive recognition. It is impor-
                                                                     
          tant to remember that it is children’s perception of what they do—helped by recognition
          from others—that gives them that ultimate sense of worth. To feel worthwhile and suc-
          cessful, children must maintain a satisfactory standard of behavior—they must behave in
          ways that will gain the love and respect of others. It is also necessary for them to behave

=== Page 236 (1 cols) ===
222   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      in a way and to perform so that what they do is worthwhile to them as well. To do this,
      they must learn to evaluate and correct behavior that is wrong and, most important,
      to give them credit when it is right. Children’s being attuned to morals, standards, and
      values of right and wrong as well as to school behavior is linked to fulfillment of their
      need for self-worth.                                           
        Although belonging and self-worth are separate, children who love and are loved will
      usually think they are worthwhile. The overindulged child can be the exception. These
      children are loved too much. Their parents mistake the total acceptance of good or
      bad behavior for good discipline. Love does not mean blanket approval. When children
      receive love for behavior that they know is wrong, they do not feel worthwhile and, thus,
      may act out as a way of asking for limits. A child needs to learn that being the subject of
      someone’s love does not in and of itself give him or her self-worth.
        Children need time for fun and time to enjoy themselves and others. This must
      involve active participation in contrast to passive participation such as watching televi-
      sion. Children, who do not know how to enjoy life actively or how to engage in having
      fun, are often too serious. As such, they tend to stress the aversiveness of a problem and
      to exaggerate the significance of things. They may also be people who construct their
      time poorly; the delinquent child often has nothing better to do than to get into trouble.
      How much fun the child has at home and school is an important variable to evaluate.
        Freedom is important to everyone. Reality therapy defines freedom as being able to
      do and say what you want within the limits of the laws of society and being able to
      express yourself without discount. Reality therapy encourages the client to look at the
      range of freedom they do have along with the responsibilities of this freedom. Discounts
      among family members and teachers and children are most destructive. Freedom from
      criticism does not imply no correction or a laissez-faire attitude. It means refraining from
      the little extra comments that teachers and parents so often make that chip away at the
      child’s self-concept: “How dumb can you be?” “Don’t you ever care about anybody but
      yourself?” Criticism of this kind tells children that they are not good people and pushes
      them toward failure identities. Criticism should always be directed at the behavior and
      not at the child or the person.                                
        When children are not fulfilling their needs, they are unhappy and must do something
      toreducetheirpainandhurt.Oftenthemeanstheydeviseareineffective,and,tryasthey
      might to succeed, they view themselves as failures. The concomitant loneliness, pain,
      and discomfort are often dealt with in four ways: depression and withdrawal, acting out,
      thinking disturbances, and sickness.                           
      Control Theory                                                 
                                                                     
      Since 1984, Glasser has integrated reality therapy with control theory, which suggests
      that the preceding basic needs are part of our genetic structure. Built into our brains

=== Page 237 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 223
                                                                     
          are these fixed needs that, if not satisfied, result in stress, tension, and suffering. At the
          survival level, these needs include food, shelter, and safety, whereas at the psychological
                                                                     
          level, they include the needs discussed earlier. Consequently, all our behavior is a con-
          stant attempt to satisfy one or more of the basic needs that are written into our genetic
          structure. When there is a difference between what we want (as perceived in our head)
          and what we perceive in the external or real world, the mismatch results in dissatisfac-
          tion.Oftenthechildinneedoftherapyhaschosenunsatisfactorybehaviorthatattempts
          to meet, but does not alleviate, those needs which remain unfulfilled.
            From one’s generalor basic needs, there isa world of specific needsthat are not genetic
                                                                     
          but learned. We usually function at the level of these specific needs although we are
          also aware of basic needs. We refer to these specific needs as wants—specific perceptions
          related to a basic need. For example, swimming is a want related to the basic need for fun.
            The mechanism through which needs are met is the inner world of wants, which is
          describedbyW.Glasser(1984)asa“picturealbum.”Exploringtheneedsandperceptions
          in this album is a means of working with a child in therapy. This is also the first procedure
          that lends itself to change.                               
                                                                     
            In a theory that explains how we live our lives on a daily basis, the brain is seen as a
          control system that seeks to control, maneuver, and mold the external world to satisfy an
          internal goal. Recently, Glasser has brought the theory to a clinical level with practical
          application (W. Glasser, 1984).                            
                                                                     
          Choice Theory                                              
                                                                     
          The main premise of choice theory is that individuals have problems because of unsat-
          isfying relationships. To make progress in human relationships we must give up the
          punishing, relationship-destroying external control psychology, which is the one most
          practice in the world. If the child is in an unhappy relationship in school or home right
          now, it is probably caused by the child or both the child and the school or home using
          external control psychology on the other. Glasser (1998) goes one step further. If, for
          example, children are depressed, their misery is usually related to a current unsatisfying
                                                                     
          relationship. This suggests that the problems are in the present, not in the past. No one
          can change what happened yesterday.                        
            Choice theory indicates that a therapist should connect with the clients’ inner quality
          world and establish a trusting relationship. Clients’ inner quality worlds are a window
          into how they would like things to be in the present. Glasser (2000) indicates that chil-
          dren and adolescents have inner mental pictures that represent their quality worlds.
                                                                     
          These fall into three categories. The first is mental pictures of the people that they
          want most. The second is things they want and prize the most; and the third is the idea
          and belief that guides their behavior. Children and adolescents have their own unique
          quality world.

=== Page 238 (1 cols) ===
224   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        Glasser (2000) argues that external control psychology operates by using strategies
      such as blaming, nagging, criticizing, labeling, punishing, complaining, and so on.
      Glasser believes that clients must replace external control psychology with behaviors
      and techniques that strengthen and support relationships. As opposite to external
      control psychology, clients need to learn to love, support, negotiate, trust, and sustain
      relationships.                                                 
        JamesandGilliland(2003)suggest10axiomsthatdrivefreedominthechoicetheory:
          1. A client can only control his or her behavior and not that of others.
          2. People can only give us information and how we process the information is a
            matter of personal choice.                               
          3. Most psychological problems are relationship problems.  
          4. Relationships are always part of the client’s current life.
          5. The past does not determine behavior and that present relationships are what
            affect current behaviors.                                
          6. Restates that clients are driven by genetic needs: survival, love and belonging,
            power, freedom, and fun.                                 
          7. Clients meet their needs by satisfying pictures that are in their quality world.
          8. All behavior is total behavior and is made up of four components: doing, think-
            ing, feeling, and physiology.                            
          9. Clients are not depressed but they are choosing to be depressed and in reality
            therapy terms they are depressing and clients are not suffering from anxiety, but
            they are choosing anxiety.                               
         10. Clients can control their feelings and physiology indirectly through what they
            choose to do or think. Hence most behaviors are chosen.  
      VIEW  OF PSYCHOPATHOLOGY                                       
                                                                     
      One of the main premises of reality therapy is that individuals have problems because of
                                                                     
      unsatisfying relationships. These problems can be demonstrated in any of the following
      four ways:                                                     
                                                                     
      Depression and Withdrawal                                      
      Unable to reduce the pain of failure and loneliness through acceptable and realistic
      means, children withdraw into the self-involvement of unhappiness and depression.
                                                                     
      Children behave in a way that causes them to feel depressed and then use that feeling
      as an excuse for an inability to handle problems. In reality therapy terms, a feeling such
      as depression is called depression because it is viewed as a feeling behavior. Depression
      is not something that comes over children, but rather is something they actively choose

=== Page 239 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 225
                                                                     
          and help create. The child would rather be depressed than admit to an inability to figure
          out better behaviors for belonging and getting along. In the child’s view, it is better to
                                                                     
          use depression as an excuse than to admit to not knowing what to do. Depressing pro-
          vides a rationalization for continuing uninvolved behavior. After all, how can anyone
          expect depressed children to become involved with others when they feel so bad? The
          successful child when feeling depressed realizes that something must be done, whereas
          the unsuccessful child fights to maintain the depressing behavior because it provides
          some temporary relief. To give up the depressed state would be to expose oneself to the
          pain of feeling like a failure—unloved and worthless. To experience this is more than
                                                                     
          the child wants to do. Depressive behavior may have some value, however, if it can be
          seen as a child’s request for help.                        
                                                                     
          Acting Out                                                 
          Another way to relieve the pain of failure and worthlessness is to act out. Many
          children strike out in an effort to get rid of pain by hurting people they believe are
          denying their needs. They are often indifferent to social rules and reinforce their lack
                                                                     
          of regard for others by putting the blame on someone else. These children are not afraid
          of punishment; they often expect it. Having identified and reinforced themselves as
          failures, they often become antagonistic, breaking home and school rules. Because they
          feel they will fail anyway, they attempt to gain what they want while expending as little
          energy as possible. Needing to fulfill this identity, they assert that they are someone—a
          failure—and they use this as a rationale for their capricious behavior. Consequently,
                                                                     
          when they are punished, these children often feel victimized or persecuted. The
          punishment they receive can serve as a source of involvement because they obtain
          attention through their acting-out behavior. Punishment is painful, but it is better than
          being alone.                                               
                                                                     
          Thinking Disturbances                                      
          Somechildren,eitherunabletofigureoutasatisfyingbehaviororhavingtriedandfailed,
                                                                     
          attempt to meet their needs by living in a world of their own. They deny reality in an
          effort to reduce pain. Once self-involved, they do not have to deal with the pain of
          failing and not being involved. For these children, their own world becomes the real
          world. All their seemingly crazy thoughts and behaviors make sense; it is an attempt to
          avoid a world that they fear they will be unable to control.
                                                                     
          Sickness                                                   
                                                                     
          Some children manifest somatic complaints such as headaches, stomachaches, nausea,
          or dizziness with no physical causes present. It may be better to stay in bed than to face
          a hectic day at school. If children are too sick, they cannot possibly do schoolwork.

=== Page 240 (1 cols) ===
226   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      For these children, the aches and physical pain are very real, making it impossible to
      carry on a normal day. By causing the child to be sick and helpless, the behaviors keep
      anger in check and allow the child to be offered help or to seek it. Probably more than
      most other behaviors this one allows for sympathy and attention. Somatic illness has the
      added attractiveness of reassuring the child and his or her teacher and parents that the
      problem is physical rather than social or psychological.       
      General Therapeutic Goals and Techniques                       
      Although reality therapy places some emphasis on behavioral change, more importance
      is givento goalsthat are concerned withvalues,relationships,and conceptsof individual
      responsibility. A strong focus is placed on helping individuals understand and accept
      themselves as they are and to improve their relationship with others. One of the most
      important needs is love and belonging and to be as close and connected with people
      we care about, which is required for satisfying most of our needs. If we are disconnected
      or not close it is seen as the source for most problems that we encounter. Individuals’
      achievements, within the limits of inherited endowment and environment, are what the
      individuals make of themselves. Decisions, not conditions, determine the way a person
      behaves and whether the person acts responsibly or irresponsibly. Other goals might
      include developing the ability to express mature and responsible love, and the ability
      to give and take. Self-awareness should move toward increasing the client’s ability to
      focus on present concerns and to avoid rehashing the past, particularly mistakes, and
      dwelling on the distant future. Soon clients will be able to act out more responsibly
      to solve personal crises more effectively and to fulfill their own needs without hurting
      others or themselves (W. Glasser & Zunin, 1979).               
        Reality therapy is a verbally active psychotherapy. A conversational exchange occurs
      betweentherapistandclientthatmayincludeagreementsanddisagreements.Clientsare
      confrontedwiththeirirresponsiblebehavior.Constructivearguingwillfocusonshowing
      the client more responsible ways of behaving. The therapist may attempt to pin down
      the clients in terms of what the clients intend to do about their current life situation.
      A statement such as “I might look for a job” will be met with questions such as how and
      when, with the therapist not accepting excuses. Throughout the therapy process, the
      therapist directs the client to focus on real-life issues and is concerned with what the
      client does and what the client plans to do.                   
        The steps for child and adolescent therapy outlined in the next section are essen-
      tially similar to the principles (e.g., see W. Glasser & Zunin, 1979) that guide all reality
                                                                     
      therapy. Reality therapy begins with the therapist communicating a caring, personal
      involvement to the client. The focus is on present behaviors and concerns, helping
      the clients make their own value judgments on whether the behavior is responsible,
      and assisting the clients in making plans to change failure behavior to success behavior.

=== Page 241 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 227
                                                                     
          Then the therapist strongly encourages the clients to make the commitment to act out
          on the value judgments and to carry out the specific plans formulated. The therapist
                                                                     
          does not accept excuses for failure, yet does not punish the client when failure occurs.
          Throughout, the therapist takes an encouraging, client-advocate stance.
                                                                     
          INDIVIDUAL PSYCHOTHERAPY   WITH CHILDREN                   
                                                                     
          AND ADOLESCENTS                                            
          Because the basic approach of reality therapy in working with children and adoles-
                                                                     
          cents is essentially the same, no distinction will be made between techniques for these
          age groups.                                                
                                                                     
          Step 1: Involvement                                        
          Thisstephasalsobeenreferredtoas“bepersonalormakefriends.”Becausechildrenwho
          are acting irresponsibly and have a failure identity are lonely and alienated, it follows
                                                                     
          that an important technique to use is to become involved with them. Involvement is a
          therapeutic prerequisite for anyone who hopes to be helped. Often this step is not given
          the importance it should have in the therapeutic process. Beginning therapists hear this
          and agree in principle but are often overly anxious to move on to the action of therapy.
          However, a therapist’s skill in dealing with a child depends heavily on this first step.
            Children must be made to believe that the person working with them is concerned.
          The therapist needs to be warm, supportive, interested, and genuine in the relation-
                                                                     
          ship. Unless this can be done from the beginning to the end, the therapy will seldom
          be successful. Convincing the child that you want to be involved is demanding, requir-
          ing a good sense of humor, patience, and acceptance. The child needs to be convinced
          that another person cares and is willing to talk about anything that is of interest to the
          child rather than just focusing on what has gone wrong. This makes it essential that
          the therapist have a good grasp of child or developmental psychology. It is important to
          know about the current television programs, movies, CD’s, or books in which children
                                                                     
          at different ages are interested. In addition, hobbies, recreational activities, and peer
          relationships should be explored.                          
            What the child says must be respected, although one does not have to agree with it all.
          If the child makes contradictory statements or is unclear, the therapist should strive for
          clarificationbysaying,forexample,“Idon’tunderstand”or“I’mconfused.”Thetherapist
          should be open and honest with the child. It should be made clear that the therapist
                                                                     
          is willing to talk about almost anything the child wishes to discuss. Initially, as little
          emphasis as possible should be placed on the child’s present symptoms or behaviors; this
          has been done enough in the past. The therapist should not focus on problems or misery
          first. This only reinforces behavior by giving value to the failure and self-involvement.

=== Page 242 (1 cols) ===
228   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      The less the therapist discusses the problem and instead stresses the possibilities open to
      the child, the better.                                         
        The question of how much time to give the child in therapy often arises. To a child
      who is lonely and uninvolved, the friendly therapist becomes a much-desired source
      of needed gratification. It is impossible to be extensively involved with every child in
      a time-consuming relationship, especially within a school setting. The therapist should
      never promise more time than can be given. Most children can accept honest statements
      from the therapist about time commitments once involvement is established. Whatever
      the amount, it is usually more productive and rewarding than what the child has had
      previously.                                                    
        During this first step, it is important to ascertain what the child wants. The therapist
      should begin where the child is, not where the therapist thinks the child is. Suggesting
      what the child might want is counterproductive. Helping children to examine wants
      and to establish priorities demonstrates early on that the children need to begin taking
      responsibility for their actions. A brief summary by the therapist during or at the end
      of the session helps children know that the therapist is paying attention. It also gives
      children a chance to hear their wants, something the children may never have listened
      to before. In addition, it gives children an opportunity to correct any misinterpretation.
      This summarizing technique continues to be valuable throughout therapy.
      Step 2: Focus on Present Behavior                              
      By focusing on present behavior, the therapist asks the child, “What are you doing?” This
      question is used in place of the “why” question of conventional therapy. The emphasis
      is on the present—what the child is doing now or what is planned for the future. Reality
      therapy sees focusing on the past to be of little use. Dwelling on the past only rein-
      forces the apparent importance of past experiences and their association with the child’s
      present problems. The only way children can work toward a successful identity is to
      become aware of their current behavior, which is usually caused by unsatisfying present
      relationships. This approach does not deny that problems can be rooted in the past. But
      we can basically only deal with current behavior in order to plan a better strategy for
      the future; we cannot undo what has already occurred. Acknowledge the child’s past,
      believe in it, but focus on the present.                       
        This does not mean that the therapist never asks about the past. If the therapist thinks
      that knowing something about the past will help plan for more suitable behavior now or
      inthefuture,suchinformationshouldbepursued.However,thetherapistshouldlookfor
                                                                     
      the past successes to use as building blocks for a better now and tomorrow. Talking about
      past failures often reinforces the child’s use of them as an excuse for present behavior:
      “My brother was this way and so am I,” or “I have a temper like my mother’s and that’s
      just the way I am.”

=== Page 243 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 229
                                                                     
            Reality therapy purports that children’s behaviors are a combination of their actions,
          thoughts, and feelings. To the child who is upset, it may seem, however, that these feel-
                                                                     
          ings are most important. The therapist should not ask children how they feel unless
          the feeling is associated strongly with what the children are doing now or plan to do
          in the future. Talking about a feeling may temporarily make the child feel better, but
          it does not change anything and is worthless in the long run. Feelings should be tied
          to the behavior that evokes them. This helps the children to understand that they can
          and must change what they are doing to find relief from this present misery. In essence,
          behavior is readily observed and responded to; feelings are not. If changes are to occur, it
                                                                     
          is easier to start with behavior than with feelings. This does not mean that the therapist
          rejects the feelings but tries to point out that the way the children feel may not be as
          important as the way the children behave. The therapist might respond, “I believe you;
          you are upset, you are angry, but what are you doing?” It is hoped that this will redirect
          the children’s attention to their responsibility for the behavior. If the child is depressed
          and is complaining about sitting at home all the time on weekends feeling miserable
          and thinking unhappy thoughts, the therapist can listen to the upset feelings but stress
                                                                     
          the sitting-at-home behavior. The therapist might ask, “Is that what you are choosing
          to do?” The idea is to focus more and more on the activity or the lack of it rather than
          on the misery and upset conditions. It is easier to change the sitting-at-home behavior
          than the depressed feelings or miserable thoughts.         
            Asking angry, acting-out children about feelings is counterproductive and may pro-
          duce more anger and hostility. Focusing on what children are doing and putting less
          emphasis on feelings may actually reduce frustration. The anger is not the cause of
                                                                     
          the problem, but rather the result of an inability on the part of the children to satisfy
          their needs.                                               
            It is a basic premise that the behavior the child exhibits is chosen. The therapist must
          keep in mind that children very seldom see their behavior as having anything to do with
          the problem. Children usually see the world—not themselves—as needing to change.
          This has often been referred to as an external locus of control. Also, children may see
                                                                     
          themselves as victims of things over which they have no control.
                                                                     
          Step 3: Value Judgment                                     
          The important question to be asked here is: “Is what you are doing helping you?” or
          “Is what you are doing against the rules?” Children must determine if the behavior is
          good for them and for those the children care for and if it is socially acceptable. Because
                                                                     
          children act by choice, they must make the judgment whether to continue the behavior.
          This is the child’s responsibility. Here the child begins to answer the question “Is it
          helping?” Children will not change until they determine that the behavior does not
          help accomplish what is wanted. What is actually being asked of the child is, “Are you

=== Page 244 (1 cols) ===
230   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      doing what will help you fulfill your needs? The therapist should be very careful here to
      remain nonjudgmental about the child’s behavior; the child is being asked to make the
      judgment.” The therapist prepares the child to make this judgment by using what was
      established in the preceding steps—the examination of the present behavior and the
      trust that comes with involvement. The value judgment may include a decision about
      what the child wants. “So you really want to quit school? Can a boy of 16 find a good
      job? Are you willing to live with the hassle of school?”       
        Often there is no clear choice about which behavior is the best or most responsible.
      In some cases, such as obtaining independence from parents, it is difficult for the child
      to make a choice. If the child is unwilling to make the judgment that what is being done
      is not helping or that it is against the rules, nothing can be planned or accomplished.
      No one can make individuals do anything as long as they are unwilling to accept the
      consequences of their behavior. The most the therapist can do is to continue to strive
      for increased involvement that will encourage a move away from failure.
      Step 4: Planning Responsible Behavior                          
      Once children have judged that their behavior is not helping and want to change, it is
      the responsibility of the therapist to help the children make a plan to do better. This is
      the time to examine the possible alternatives to the child’s present behavior and to help
      the child find new behaviors that lead to a better connection. Both the positive and
      negative alternatives should be discussed. Children often have a limited repertoire of
      behavioral responses, making it difficult for them to suggest many alternatives. Initially,
      the therapist may have to generate some ideas. More than one idea or alternative should
      be presented so that children can choose the one most acceptable to them. In some
      cases where the therapist must make a plan for children, it is important to establish that
      children think they can carry it out. Actually, it does not matter who makes the plan
      as long as it is accepted and becomes the children’s plan. It is hoped that the child will
      learn new behaviors via the plan of action developed. Sometimes, planning proceeds by
      trial and error; that is, a plan is developed, attempted, and perhaps modified until one is
      found that fits the situation.                                 
        The therapist should be aware that making plans takes skill and that the following
      critical components must be considered:                        
                                                                     
         • The plan must be small and manageable, in terms of both time and what the child is
           going to do. For example, a child might do 15 minutes of homework for each of 4
                                                                     
           days. If the plan is too large, it will only reinforce failure. The child needs to feel
           successful. To allow the child to say, “I will not fight from now on” is setting the
           child up for future failure. It would be better for the child to say, “I won’t fight in
           the next 2 hours.” Only after initial successes can the time be prolonged.

=== Page 245 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 231
                                                                     
            • The plan must be specific, definite, and detailed. It should be something the child
              can visualize doing, like completing a math assignment. Key words for the ther-
                                                                     
              apist to use here include what, where, how, when, with whom, and how many.
              The plan should also depend on what the child does rather than what others do:
              “I will clean my room every Monday if you let me stay up and watch TV” is an
              unsatisfactory plan; “I will clean my room every week” is better.
            • The plan should be reasonable. It should make sense, and the child and therapist
              should see the value in doing it.                      
            • The plan should be positive. The focus should be on what the children are going to
                                                                     
              do rather than on what they are not going to do.       
            • The plan should begin as soon as possible. The longer children wait to put a plan
              into effect, the less likely they are to do it.        
            • The plan should be repetitive. It should be something that can be done often or
              something that can be easily repeated each day. This helps form daily patterns of
              the new behavior.                                      
                                                                     
                                                                     
            If the plan fails, the therapist must have the ability to think of another one or to help
          the child replan. If, in the attempt to make a new plan, a problem comes up that seems
          unresolvable, rather than force the issue, it is better for the therapist to relax and just
          chat with the child about an interesting subject. In time, it is hoped, child and therapist
          will be able to return to the difficulty during the session and resolve it.
            After a plan has been made, it is often wise to return to the value judgment step. The
                                                                     
          therapist should ask the child if the plan is workable. “The therapist might ask the child,
          for example,” “Is the plan reasonable or is it asking for too much?” It is also beneficial to
          have the child repeat the plan to be sure that the child understands it. This clarification
          again points out the potential value of summarizing.       
            If children carry out the plan, this accomplishment is the beginning of their becoming
          more responsible; this concept cannot be overly stressed. The therapist will have to
          emphasizerepeatedlythatchildrenmusttaketheresponsibility,thatthingsinlifecannot
                                                                     
          always be done for them, and that they must live their own life. The child must recognize
          that the therapist will be of help for a while but that all the therapist can do is to get
          this process started. The child must come to the realization that eventually all people
          must assume responsibility for their behavior and live in a world much larger than the
          restricted world of therapy.                               
                                                                     
          Step 5: Commitment to the Plan                             
                                                                     
          After the child makes the reasonable, workable plan, a commitment must be obtained
          that the plan will be carried out. The child is being asked, “Will you do it?” This is
          an important stage in plan making because it shifts the responsibility to the child.

=== Page 246 (1 cols) ===
232   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Commitment is both motivating and binding. It means that the child is no longer
      alone. What children do now is not only for themselves but also for someone else. This
      helps provide a sense of strength and purpose.                 
        Getting the failure-identity child to make a commitment is not always an easy task.
      Having already failed on a number of occasions, these children are often reluctant to
      commit themselves again for fear of exposing themselves to more painful rejection and
      consequent feelings of worthlessness. Commitment is also involvement, which may be
      met with resistance. However, until the child is willing to make a commitment to some-
      thing or someone else, it is likely that the child will remain self-involved and unable to
      develop a success identity.                                    
        The commitment is made either verbally or in writing. A written commitment is
      preferred because it is stronger, more binding, and clearer. There is little doubt about
      the conditions of a commitment when they are written out and signed by the child.
      It is a good idea for the therapist to sign it also, thus demonstrating involvement.
      Two copies of the agreement are made, one for the child and one for the therapist as
      a backup in case the child loses the copy. This approach may sound too businesslike
      and legal, but it is a fact that a person is more hesitant to escape from a written
      commitment than from a verbal one. It also avoids disagreements over the terms of
      the plan.                                                      
      Step 6: Accept No Excuses                                      
      Plans do fail sometimes, and the therapist must make it clear that excuses are unaccept-
      able because they break the involvement and allow the child an opportunity to avoid
      responsibility. Excuses, if allowed, do provide temporary relief; they reduce the child’s
      tension and improve feelings on a short-term basis. The excuse undermines the need
      for action because momentarily the child is off the hook. Too frequently, teachers and
      parents accept apologies such as “I’m sorry” because it is easier to accept the apology
      than to go through the time-consuming process of assessing responsibility and present
      behavior. It is also very possible that the child could interpret the acceptance of excuses
      as a lack of concern. The accepting of an excuse also implies that the child’s inadequacy
      and inability are also accepted.                               
        Whenthechilddoesnotfollowthroughonthecommitmenttotheplan,thetherapist
      asks, “When will you do it?” or “When will it happen?” or “I’m glad you are sorry, but
      what are you planning to do so that this same thing doesn’t happen again?” It may be
      necessary to alter the plan. The child is not discounted or punished for failing. Actually,
                                                                     
      without punishment or rejection, there are no good reasons for excuses.
        When the commitment fails, the plan must be reevaluated. If the plan is still
      reasonable, the child must decide whether to commit to it again. At this point, a value
      judgment must again be obtained from the child, and a new plan and commitment

=== Page 247 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 233
                                                                     
          formulated. A good way to reduce excuses is to ask for a value judgment every time
          the child gives an excuse. Often, the making of an excuse is evidence that the child
                                                                     
          has not fully understood the value judgment that was made. The therapist might
          say, “Do you want to work at getting along with your teacher or do you want to
          give up?” Returning to the value judgment often helps put the therapy back on the
          right track.                                               
            A teacher faced with excuses might say, “If you don’t do your assignment, I will not
          punish you, but I do insist we work out a better solution. I don’t care why you didn’t do
          the assignment; I will accept your thinking that you have a valid reason. However, we
                                                                     
          have to solve the problem. We have to find a better way for you to follow the rules and
          get your schoolwork done.”                                 
                                                                     
          Step 7: Do Not Punish                                      
          This step probably elicits the most controversy. Many successful people regard the fear
          of punishment as the prod toward achievement. As a result, punishment has enjoyed a
                                                                     
          solid reputation in our society. Punishment, although never good, can serve as a deter-
          rent to the success-oriented child who may have strayed momentarily from the path of
          responsibility. With the child who is a failure, however, punishment often reinforces the
          failure identity; the punishment only confirms the child’s low self-esteem and can even
          sanction other reckless behavior.                          
            The goal here is not to put more pressure on the child than is now being experienced.
          This step recognizes and accepts that children do not function well when they are hurt-
                                                                     
          ing. It proposes that although there is not to be any punishment administered, minimally
          painful, reasonable consequences (i.e., appropriate discipline) have value.
            Criticism is also unacceptable. Many children who fail actually expect the therapist
          to be critical and hard on them and may attempt to provoke this attitude. If the therapist
          succumbs, the child will use the therapist’s behavior to continue excusing inadequacies.
          This is a popular game played by failing children. A nonpunitive, noncritical therapist
                                                                     
          will not become involved in the child’s inadequate lifestyle.
            Reality therapy defines punishment as any treatment that is intended to cause a child
          mental or physical pain. Punishment is to be distinguished from natural consequences or
          discipline. A comprehensive list of the differences (Table 7.1) between the two is given
          by Dreikurs, Grunwald, and Pepper (1971).                  
            This step does not imply that reality therapy is passive, permissive therapy. Discipline
          is an essential part of reality therapy for children. Reasonable, agreed-on consequences
                                                                     
          for irresponsible behaviors are not punishment but discipline. Logical consequences set
          out the reality of social responsibility. In any given situation, it is necessary that the
          rules be learned. The establishment of consequences and the understanding of rules
          help to eliminate the element of the unexpected. Children should suffer reasonable

=== Page 248 (1 cols) ===
234   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Table 7.1 Differences Between Punishment and Discipline        
                 Punishment                Discipline                
       1. Not appropriate for (related to) the action.               
          Too severe.                                                
                                  1. Appropriate for the action. Not too severe or
                                     meaningless.                    
       2. Unexpected because the punisher has reacted                
          on the spur of the moment.                                 
                                  2. Expected because the individual has been
                                     informed of the rules and results of
                                     infringement.                   
       3. Often delayed.          3. Immediate consequences.         
       4. Expresses power of a personal authority 4. Based on logical consequences expressing the
                                     reality of the social order.    
       5. Punishment imposed. Responsibility is that                 
          of the punisher (no choices).                              
                                  5. Discipline assumed. Responsibility is that of
                                     the individual (choices offered).
       6. Focuses on stopping past negative behavior. 6. Focuses on teaching present and future positive
                                     behavior (e.g., mistakes are seen as chances
                                     to learn). Solution orientation.
       7. Focuses on external control of behavior. 7. Focuses on reinforcing internal control of
                                     behavior.                       
       8. Reinforces failure identity (confirms low                  
          self-esteem and may increase rebellion and                 
          hostility or withdrawal).                                  
                                  8. Emphasizes teaching ways that will result in a
                                     more successful identity.       
       9. Often is, or is seen as, an expression of anger            
          and hostility.                                             
                                  9. Should be friendly—a partnership.
      10. Easy, expedient, and requires little skill. 10. Difficult, time-consuming, requires much
                                     patience.                       
      11. Often alienates the individual. 11. Strengthens the relationship over time as
                                     consistency demonstrates caring.
      12. Expression of moral judgment by punisher. 12. Individuals’ own value judgment of their
                                     behavior.                       
      13. Often seen as linked to the punishee rather                
          than to the act (doer is wrong).                           
                                 13. Linked to the act (emphasis is on the deed).
      14. Only recognizes results. 14. Recognizes effort as well as results.
      15. No opportunity for individual to redress wrong. 15. Opportunity for individual’s retribution or
                                     repair.                         
      consequences when they break the rules. Yelling at children adds nothing to the learn-
      ing process and only makes things worse. The child might now suffer what is perceived
      as the loss of parental or teacher approval and is burdened additionally with the work of
      reconciliation.                                                
        If the child breaks the rules at school or at home, reasonable consequences must
      follow. The most reasonable of these is deprivation of either a freedom or a privilege.
      The child might be asked to sit in a chair at home or school until a plan is worked out.
      A quiet place to sit, to do schoolwork, to think, provides the child with the opportunity
      to get over the upset and to think about a plan. After an appropriate length of time, the
      teacher or parent should approach the child in a mild manner offering an opportunity for
      problem solving. If the child is ready, they then return to Step 4 and continue planning
      from there.

=== Page 249 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 235
                                                                     
            Children should not be allowed to criticize themselves unless it is part of a value
          judgment or is tied to a plan to correct the problem. Even under these circumstances,
                                                                     
          such criticism should not be accepted but rather dealt with. If the child says, “I’m no
          good; I never do right,” the therapist might reply, “I don’t think I can go along with
          that. You go to school every day on time, and some of the time, from what you say, you
          do well. You are also here which shows a willingness not seen in everyone. You are doing
          some things right.”                                        
            It is also important that the therapist refrain from criticizing the child. Instead, the
          therapist might say, “Is what you are doing helping you or anyone else?” or “I think I can
                                                                     
          suggest a better way; let’s discuss it.” The child has an option in the second statement
          and is assured of help in doing better. During all of this, the child is learning a better way
          to handle problems and to cooperate with another person.   
                                                                     
          Step 8: Never Give Up                                      
          This last step is a reminder to the therapist. No matter what the child does or says,
          the therapist should continue to convey the attitude of persistence long after the child
                                                                     
          wants the therapist to give up. Not giving up will, it is hoped, solidify the idea for the
          child that someone does care. Often the child begins to work only after receiving this
          assurance.                                                 
            Wubbolding (1995, 2011) has suggested that reality therapy is not a series of steps and
          they do not have to be followed in the order that was given above. He sees reality therapy
          as a cycle and can be entered at any point. Wubbolding has developed the WDEP system
          to demonstrate the cycle of reality therapy. The acronym WDEP involves the following
                                                                     
          components:                                                
            • W evaluates the wants, desires, and commitment to change of the client. He lists
              five levels of commitment and sees these levels as being hierarchical (i.e., higher
                                                                     
              levels represent higher levels of commitment):         
              1. I am not thrilled about being here.                 
              2. I want the results, but I do not want to go through the process.
              3. I will try.                                         
              4. I will do my best.                                  
              5. I will do whatever the task requires.               
            • D involves the therapist evaluating what clients are doing and consists of total
                                                                     
              behaviors, which are composed of doing, thinking, feeling, and physiology.
            • Eiswherethetherapisthelpstheclientstoevaluatetheirbehaviors,wants,needs,
              level of commitment, and plans. This is the assessment of the effectiveness of the
              clients’ behaviors.                                    
            • P is a plan that should be based on self-realizations. The plan should help the
              clients to obtain their needs.

=== Page 250 (1 cols) ===
236   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        Wubbolding (1995) has also listed five interventions that the therapist should be
      aware of when conducting reality therapy:                      
         1. Always be courteous.                                     
         2. Always be determined.                                    
         3. Always be enthusiastic.                                  
         4. Always be firm.                                          
         5. Always be genuine.                                       
        These interventions are necessary to build strong relationships and involvement with
      clients.                                                       
      REALITY THERAPY  AND CHOICE  THEORY                            
      W. Glasser (1998, 2000) has asserted that the methods of reality therapy are consistent
      with the concepts of choice theory.                            
        The goal of reality therapy in counseling or teaching is to help children and adoles-
      cents gain more effective control over their life and to form better relationships. In the
      classroom, teachers can use these same ideas to help the students become aware that it
      is beneficial to work hard and succeed academically. In either case, the goal is to help
      children to become more responsible. To accomplish this, children are asked to look
      honestly in the direction the behavior is heading and to determine whether this direc-
                                                                     
      tion is satisfactory both immediately and in the long run. If either the direction of their
      life or the behavior they are choosing in order to move in this direction is not as satis-
      fying or effective as desired, the goal of reality therapy is to help find a more effective
      behavior, a better direction, or both.                         
        To do this, the steps of reality therapy have been expanded and reworked into two
      major components of reality therapy counseling (W. Glasser, 1986b): the counseling
      environment and the procedures that lead to change. These components should be used
                                                                     
      together if counseling is to be effective.                     
      Counseling Environment                                         
                                                                     
      The counselor must attempt to develop an environment in which the clients feel secure
      enough to make an adequate evaluation of the effectiveness of their present behaviors.
      Clients are then helped both to learn and to attempt different behaviors in an effort
      to find more effective ways to meet their needs that involve relationships with oth-
                                                                     
      ers. The success of therapy depends on maintaining this environment throughout the
      counseling relationship.                                       
        The counseling environment needs to be perceived by the child as safe and positive.
      Children come or are brought to counseling when some aspect of their life is not in

=== Page 251 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 237
                                                                     
          effective control. It is critical for children to see the therapist as a person who is capable
          and interested in assisting them to find better choices for behavior. Therapists need to
                                                                     
          present themselves as persons who are not overwhelmed by the problems of the children
          and their family. To do this, therapists should avow confidence in the children’s ability
          to learn to live life more responsibly and effectively.    
            The therapist must remember that clients behave according to the perceptions of
          their own world (as held in the mind). We must realize that what the client perceives
          may be very different from what the therapist and others close to the client might per-
          ceive. Early in therapy, time is directed toward helping the client understand that these
                                                                     
          differences exist. Learning to deal with these differences becomes the next step in ther-
          apy. Unless the client can learn to get along better with those who perceive the world
          differently, it will be difficult to satisfy needs effectively.
            Clients are more successful when they recognize and accept the responsibility for
          a chosen behavior. The role of the therapist is to maintain a relationship with the
          child that:                                                
                                                                     
            • Is simple and easy to understand.                      
                                                                     
            • Creates goals that are within the reach of the child.  
            • Helps the child avoid excuses and accept responsibility.
            • Emphasizes the child’s assets and strengths.           
            • Gives the child a chance to learn and to try new and more effective behaviors.
            • Creates changes that are observable and helpful.       
                                                                     
          Procedures That Lead to Change                             
                                                                     
          First, the therapist needs to focus on the child’s total behaviors; that is, how the child
          is acting, thinking, and feeling at the present time. Next, a child must learn that these
          total behaviors are chosen.                                
            To effect this, ask the client what is wanted now. If the client does not know, con-
          tinue to focus on the choices and the resultant direction in which those choices are
                                                                     
          taking the client. The critical question to ask here is, “Does your present behavior have
          a chance of getting you what you want now and will it take you in the direction you
          want to go?”                                               
            If the answer is no, this implies that the clients’ directions are reasonable, but that
          the present behaviors will not get them there. At this point, therapists should help the
          clients plan new behaviors. For example, “I want to improve my grades but to do so I will
                                                                     
          have to study more.”                                       
            At times, clients are unable to move in the right direction regardless of how much
          effort they put forth. If this occurs, the therapist should ask the client to consider chang-
          ing directions. For example, “No matter how hard I study, my grades do not improve.

=== Page 252 (1 cols) ===
238   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      I may have to consider a tutor.” In this case, the plan now focuses more on changing the
      direction of the behavior than on the behavior itself.         
        If the answer to the critical question is yes, the behavior will get the client what
      is wanted now and will achieve the desired direction. Such an answer indicates
      that the client sees nothing wrong with this current behavior or the direction it
      is taking.                                                     
        Before a plan is attempted, both client and therapist should agree that it has a reason-
      able chance of success, and a commitment should be given for follow-through. Usually
      the client who makes commitments tends to work harder. With younger children, a
      written commitment is generally more effective than a verbal one.
        The therapist should remember that clients choose their behavior and that the best
      behavior is always that which the clients believe can be accomplished. To this extent,
      the behaviors are effective for the client. The therapist must also be aware that a client
      will not change a behavior until it appears that the present behavior will either not
      result in what is wanted or will not take the appropriate direction. Change becomes
      possible only when clients believe that another available behavior will allow them to
      satisfy needs in a more acceptable way.                        
      Reality Therapy Techniques                                     
      The following techniques are used in the application of these steps of reality therapy:
         • Humor: The therapist may use humor to help the child understand that things are
           notasseriousastheyappear.Itcanbeusedforconfrontingissuessuchasirrational
           behavior or lack of responsibility. It also helps clients develop the healthy ability
           to laugh at themselves. The message in humor is that life can be better, that there
           is hope, and that laughter is good medicine.              
         • Confrontation: Facing the child with a here-and-now, no-excuses stance is def-
           initely confrontational. Most confrontations require client action: A value is
           pushed, and the client is challenged to look for alternatives and is encouraged
                                                                     
           to formulate a new plan. This technique is often used when children are unable
           to shake the mistaken ideas or beliefs behind their behavior.
         • Contracts: A written contract is often used in therapy. A signed contract serves as
           evidence of the client’s intent to change behavior. It also specifies those changes
           in written form. Completion of a contract, like the fulfillment of needs, pro-
           motes feelings of self-worth within an individual. Here is evidence that the child
                                                                     
           can work responsibly toward a goal and succeed. Contracts may be one-sentence
           agreements such as, “Jack will speak to one new friend by Friday,” or they may be
           quite detailed. The therapist and client each should sign the contract and keep a
           copy of it.

=== Page 253 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 239
                                                                     
            • Instruction: When a specific skill is needed to formulate a new course of action,
              instruction may be needed. This can be part of the therapy session if the ther-
                                                                     
              apist has the needed competence or, if not, the child can be referred elsewhere
              for skill instruction. If at all possible, the client should be encouraged to assume
              responsibility for the instruction/learning process.   
            • Information: The child often needs specific and new information for a plan of
              action and the therapist should be ready to provide it. If the therapist does not
              have the information the client requires, the therapist should assist the client in
              finding it. It is the therapist’s responsibility to have available a list of probable
                                                                     
              and reliable sources.                                  
            • Role playing: Role playing is often used when a child is experiencing difficulties in
              interpersonal relationships or needs to practice a new behavior. Role playing is
              frequently followed with a feedback session—a discussion of what the client and
              therapist experienced while playing the roles of others. The session often affords
              the therapist the opportunity to encourage clients by emphasizing what they did
                                                                     
              well. Role playing also offers an opportunity to focus on nonverbal behaviors that
              are part of successful behavioral interactions.        
            • Support:Supportisusedtoincreasethechild’sawareness,anticipation,andexpec-
              tation of a positive outcome. Children with a failure identity need much support,
              especially when putting their plans into action. They have learned to expect
              failure and do not want to take any further risks. Encouragement and support
              are paramount if children are to commit to a new or different behavior. Support
                                                                     
              can be given by (a) asking the children’s opinion, (b) requesting the children’s
              evaluation of their present behavior, (c) providing praise for successfully com-
              pleting a plan, and (d) expressing confidence in the child’s ability to change.
              If successful, this approach will usually increase the child’s motivation and serve
              to communicate feelings of worth.                      
            • Homework assignments: Homework is used to build continuity between sessions
              and to facilitate counseling by encouraging the child to work on problems
                                                                     
              between sessions. Typical assignments include trying a new behavior, reducing or
              stopping a present behavior, keeping a record of current behavior, or researching
              solutions to a specific problem.                       
            • Bibliotherapy: The goals of bibliotherapy include (a) allowing children to see
              the similarity between their problems and those of others, (b) encouraging free
              expression concerning problems, (c) looking at alternative solutions, (d) helping
                                                                     
              the children to analyze attitudes and behaviors. When using bibliotherapy, be
              sure to discuss the readings with the child. Discussion should be focused on
              feelings, thoughts, behaviors, and consequences. Make certain that the children
              see the relationship between the reading and their own life. Bibliotherapy can be

=== Page 254 (1 cols) ===
240   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
           viewed as a form of cognitive restructuring directed toward educating the child
           about certain areas of concern such as sex, divorce, or death. Suggested books
           for bibliotherapy can be found without difficulty.        
         • Self-disclosure: Some self-disclosure by the therapist is usually needed to obtain
           involvement with the client. Because reality therapy calls for active and equal
           participation of both the client and therapist, there may be times when therapists
           are asked how they deal with certain problems. In such circumstances, relevant
           to therapeutic goals, the therapist can share personal experiences.
         • Summarizing and reviewing: Because clients often give the impression that they are
           listening when they are not, it is advisable to have the child summarize what was
           said or discussed in the therapy session. This can be done halfway through the
           session and/or at the end of it.                          
         • Restitution: It is better to help the student make restitution for a behavior than to
           applypunishment.Thegoalofthistechniqueistoassistthestudentindeveloping
           self-discipline. Children are helped to understand that they can learn to remedy
           their mistakes. One does not focus on the fault or the mistake. The focus is on
           making things right. The therapist’s job is to offer information and examples,
           answer questions, demonstrate, and question. Some restitution options are to fix
           it, pay back, say several positive things about another child, or give time in lieu
           of payment.                                               
         • Questioning: Use questioning to gather information, especially to clarify what was
           said. Well-timed questions help clients think about what they want and evaluate
           whether their behavior is leading them in the right direction.
         • Paradox: This technique was introduced into reality therapy by Wubbolding
           (1988). It is designed to counter strong resistance to a plan that is not carried
           out. The usual approach is to ask the client not to continue the plan, to go slowly
           in carrying it out, or to keep breaking it. Sometimes the best way to make desired
           changes is to do so indirectly. This involves looking at the subject’s behavior in
           an inverse way.                                           
      GROUP  PROCEDURES  WITH CHILDREN  AND ADOLESCENTS              
                                                                     
      Once the therapist has established involvement and a relationship with the child, it
      is still necessary to convince the child that such relationships are also available with
                                                                     
      others. Reality therapy can be used with groups as well as with individuals. At this point
      in treatment, the advantages of group therapy become apparent. The group offers the
      opportunityforinvolvementandprovidesmoresupport,needsatisfaction,andassurance
      than any one individual can provide. There is also more opportunity for safety in risking

=== Page 255 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 241
                                                                     
          or trying new behaviors. Often, too, when children listen to and become involved with
          other children, they become less self-involved. The group also allows a wide range of
                                                                     
          feelings and thoughts to be expressed. Instead of having only the therapist who cares for
          and approves of the child, there is now the potential for the child to experience approval
          from the whole group. Being part of the group means that the child has an opportunity
          to get personal, to be warm, to show concern, and to develop more responsible behavior.
          This gives the child a taste of success and the chance to feel better about him- or herself.
                                                                     
          Become Involved                                            
                                                                     
          In the initial stages of the group, the therapist takes an active role. Responsibility and
          caring must be molded while getting the group members involved with one another.
          The therapist becomes involved with each member of the group, asking questions,
          requesting information, and encouraging comments. It is advisable to use games, value
          clarification,orgroupprojectsduringthebeginningsessionsratherthantofocusonprob-
          lems. As in the first step of reality therapy with individuals, being friendly is important
                                                                     
          to involvement; it may take five or six sessions to get the group running smoothly.
                                                                     
          Focus on Reality                                           
          Thetherapistmusthelpthegroupstofocusonreality.Afterinvolvementhasbeenestab-
          lished, the attention is focused on present behaviors and problems. Events discussed in
          the group should be kept to a minimum. The children are encouraged to evaluate and
                                                                     
          analyze, with the therapist asking such questions as: “What are you doing?” “What do
          you want?” “Is it doing you any good?” “Is it against the rules?” These questions help
          the children focus on the reality of the situation. The therapist does not evaluate the
          behavior but helps the children to become more aware of the behavior and to reach
          a decision about it. The children, however, may evaluate behavior and can also offer
          specific suggestions concerning how they would handle certain problems.
                                                                     
          Make a Plan                                                
                                                                     
          Initially, therapists will be very active in plan making. It will more than likely be up to
          them to develop alternative plans or different choices. However, therapists must always
          encourage the children to become actively involved in this process. The therapist is
          cautioned to help make a reasonable plan that will have the best opportunity for success.
          After a plan has been decided on, a commitment is obtained from the child or children
                                                                     
          involved. If the plan does not work, the therapist must firmly refuse to accept excuses;
          no one should be let off the hook. The therapist should be supportive and encouraging
          by asking, “Are you going to carry it out?” but the therapist must not punish or allow the
          other children to punish.

=== Page 256 (1 cols) ===
242   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Establish Rules                                                
      The therapist, together with the children, must see that rules are established and conse-
      quences are set up if the rules are broken. For example, it might be established that one
      must raise a hand to speak to the group. The first time children do not follow this rule, a
      warning is given; the second time the rule is broken, the children must leave the group
      until they feel able to follow the rule; the third time, the children must leave the group
      and may not come back until they present a plan for following the rule.
      Group Makeup                                                   
      Many therapists, because of time demands, put all their problem children in one group.
      A group made up solely of children with acting-out behaviors, history of truancy, or
      academicdifficultiesisdestinedtofail.Ifonepurposeofthegroupistohelpchildrenwith
      failure identities, it makes sense that they should be involved with or come into contact
      with children who have successful identities. For the most part, children with failure
      identities learn very little that is responsible from other children with failure identities.
      Truant children have little that is constructive to offer another truant—if anything, they
      may reinforce and support the truant behavior. A child with a good attendance record
      may be more likely to help the truant as this child is already living more responsibly
      and can offer strength, encouragement, and support of the failing child. The successful
      child may be able to think of several alternatives or different choices for the problem
      situation and may also help in the development of a plan. It is important to include
      successful children in the group whenever possible.            
      Group Size and Duration                                        
                                                                     
      The size of the group will depend on the purpose of the group and the setting in
      which it occurs. However, 8 to 10 children are more than enough to work with at one
      time. With younger children, the therapist may want to begin with a smaller number.
      The group must meet regularly, thus giving the children the opportunity to plan to
      attend and to assume responsibility for being on time. Age becomes an important
                                                                     
      variable when considering a time frame. W. Glasser (1969) recommends that primary
      school children begin by meeting for 10 to 15 minutes per session, increasing to 30 min-
      utes per session. Fourth, fifth, and sixth graders can easily meet for 30 to 45 minutes,
      and high schoolers for 45 minutes to an hour. The minimum number of meetings for all
      age groups is once a week; two or three times a week is more desirable.
                                                                     
      Time of Day                                                    
                                                                     
      A morning time is preferable when the children are fresh. Meetings should not be
      scheduled before recess or lunch.

=== Page 257 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 243
                                                                     
          CLASSROOM  AND EDUCATIONAL  APPLICATIONS                   
                                                                     
          If one were to poll junior and senior high school-age children concerning their objec-
          tions to school, many would reply that school has no relevance to the real world and
          that, although they are forced to go, they simply put in their class time, waiting for the
          10 minutes of socialization between classes and the half hour at lunch. Those who com-
                                                                     
          ply with the system often complain that they are learning to memorize, not to think.
          Or those who have gotten on the memorization railroad, ride it all the way to the per-
          fect A report card, the graduation with honors, and the scholarships waiting at the end
          of the line. Either way, there are prevailing feelings among these students that school is
          something to which they submit, that apathy serves better than taking on the system,
          and that teachers and the administration do not care as long as they get paid. Although
          it may be harder to elicit these feelings from the elementary school children, they are
                                                                     
          there, expressed in the child who reaches over and crumples a classmate’s paper, or who
          wanders aimlessly around the room, or who bullies on the playground.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          The Classroom Meeting                                      
          Fun, freedom, power, and belonging—the four components of a successful identity if
          one follows the thinking of reality therapy—are for the most part missing from our edu-
          cational system where an “If you want to pass, you’ll do it my way” attitude prevails.
                                                                     
          It is possible, however, at any level to begin to help students (a) become involved in
          developing goals of their own, (b) form better relationships with one another and with
          their teachers, (c) experience success, (d) gain confidence in their control over their
          education, and (e) enjoy the process.                      
            Thevehiclethathasofferedstudentsafeelingofbelongingandofsocialresponsibility,
          that has given them an opportunity to both give and receive concern, is the classroom
          meeting. Basically, there are three types: (1) open-ended, (2) education-diagnostic, and
                                                                     
          (3) social-problem solving. These meetings allow the teacher to apply some principles
          of reality therapy in the classroom.                       
            The open-ended meeting centers on thought-provoking questions related to the chil-
          dren’s lives. The teacher presents hypothetical questions designed to enable the children
          to become involved. The discussion that follows is aimed at stimulating and develop-
          ing intellectual curiosity. Any topic of interest to the class can be used. There are no
          right or wrong answers, only alternatives. Topics might include any number of relevant
          issues (depending, to an extent, on the age of the children) such as war, politics, taxes,
                                                                     
          or abortion. At no time should the teacher or leader of the group make value judgments.
            Education-diagnostic meetings are directly related to what the class is studying. Teachers
          may use this meeting to evaluate their teaching techniques and the current curricu-
          lum. This kind of class meeting provides an alternative to objective testing and helps

=== Page 258 (1 cols) ===
244   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      determine whether the children are learning the material being taught. The meeting is
      informational—“How much have my students learned?”—and is not used for grading. It
      is seen as an efficient method for determining the children’s strengths and weaknesses
      in a given subject. The discussion should provoke individual thinking and allow the
      children to correct false or misguided information.            
        The social-problem-solving meeting deals with any individual or group problems of the
      class or school. Problem solving is the major thrust here. Solutions, it should be pointed
      out, never include punishment or faultfinding. This type of meeting gives the children
      some feeling of control over their lives. Loneliness, attendance, grades, and individual
      behavior problems are legitimate issues for discussion. The meetings should not strive
      for perfect answers but should at least work toward clarification of problems that may
      very well not have solutions. The child learns that it is beneficial to discuss problems
      and learns to recognize that there is more than one way of dealing with a problem.
        All these meetings should be conducted with everyone seated in a circle. The circle
      provides the children with a feeling of acceptance because they have been allotted an
      equal amount of space with one another and the teacher.        
        The initial role of the teacher is to generate questions that will arouse the children’s
      interest. A basic technique to help stimulate interaction among the children is what
      has been called a floater. This is a statement that does not call for an answer; it is sim-
      ply a comment sent out for response. Teachers should not feel a need to fill voids or
      silence; instead, they can offer another nondirective comment or can simply wait for a
      response. It is critical that the teacher respond to early statements by the children in a
      way that will not turn them off. This is best accomplished by remaining relatively value
      free. For example, even a very good response should not be praised because such praise
      may inhibit some of the other children from offering what they then believe is a com-
      ment of less importance. The teacher should, however, indicate an appreciation for the
      contribution. Children who fail to volunteer might be brought into the discussion by
      saying, “You are paying attention; would you like to comment?” or “Think about it and
      let me know if you come up with an idea or answer.” It is important that the teacher be
      supportive of any child’s effort and discourages any attempt to criticize a child. If one
      child is dominating the group’s time, the teacher can handle this situation by saying,
      “Thanks for your comments; let’s hear from someone else now.”  
        When a student behaves in a way that is disruptive to the other students in the class,
      this student needs to be confronted and helped by the entire class. For this type of situ-
      ation, the social-problem-solving meeting is held. Here the so-called problem children
      hear what the other children think of their behavior. The teacher needs to be more in
      control of this type of meeting to ensure that it does not become a free-for-all. The rea-
      son for the meeting should be explained to the class (e.g., to discuss that a child has
      been stealing from other children). It is suggested that the group might be able to help

=== Page 259 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 245
                                                                     
          the child to act in a more responsible manner. The children are asked to state what this
          child has been doing that interferes with them personally. The children are encouraged
                                                                     
          to tell the child directly what the behaviors are and the effects that these behaviors have
          had on them. After each person in the group, including the teacher, has had a chance to
          speak, the children with the irresponsible behavior are given a chance to explain what
          others have done to interfere with them. At this point, the meeting moves quickly from
          getting all the facts out on the table to doing something with the information that has
          been obtained. It might be suggested that the class and the child involved offer some
          possible solution to the problem that would be acceptable to everyone. The teacher lis-
                                                                     
          tens to all the solutions and then tells the group to narrow down the alternative plans
          and solutions. Last, the child is asked to pick a plan and commit to it. The class members
          are also asked to commit themselves to doing anything that will help the child carry out
          the plan. The conclusion of the meeting is an agreed-on, manageable plan.
            These class meetings are basically techniques used by individual teachers in their
          respective classrooms. A school-wide approach to discipline or problem solving has been
          formulated by W. Glasser (1974) and is presented in the next section.
                                                                     
          Ten-Step Discipline Program                                
                                                                     
          Reality therapy is a common sense, nonpunitive approach that helps the children figure
          out what to do when their behavior is displeasing to themselves or interfering with the
          rights or needs of others. It focuses mainly on personal involvement and is structured
          toward helping the children plan, and commits them to a plan that will make their lives
                                                                     
          better. Reality therapy helps children gain a sense of belonging and personal worth.
            Based on the principles of reality therapy, a 10-step, school-wide approach for
          dealing with problem children has been developed. The approach deals with problems
          by means of a constructive, no-nonsense but nonpunitive method built on a positive
          teacher-student involvement, but it does not accept excuses in place of results.
          Built into the program are alternatives to consider when something does not work.
                                                                     
            For example, Jack has behavior problems in school. It is now February, and despite
          several conferences with the principal, the school psychologist, and Jack’s parents, noth-
          ing seems to be working. Perhaps Jack comes from a poor home background or is an only
          child or is the last child of a large family. He has barely learned to read and may have
          had few good school experiences. Whatever his problems, the teacher now has Jack in
          the classroom for an entire school year, and if the teacher cannot get him to cooperate,
          Jack will suffer and the teacher’s life will be miserable. 
                                                                     
            If the following 10 steps to better control are followed by the teacher, Jack may be
          helped to change. His behavior can become, though not perfect, improved enough to
          reward all the efforts. No miracles will occur; it is hard, slow work. A period of several
          months is probably a good minimum time commitment.

=== Page 260 (1 cols) ===
246   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        This 10-step program is divided into three parts: Steps 1 through 3 look realistically
      at how children are dealing with their problems and are concerned with what can be
      done to decrease or reduce these problems. Steps 4 through 6 give the teacher a simple,
      practical approach for working with the children and getting the children to identify,
      evaluate, and plan alternatives to their unacceptable behavior. Steps 7 through 10 con-
      sider resources within the school and/or community that can be used if the children
      refuse to change the behavior or continues to break the rules. 
      Steps 1 to 3: What Am I Doing Here?                            
      Step 1: What Am I Doing That Isn’t Working?                    
      Set aside some time and make a list of the things you currently do when Jack upsets
      you. Ask yourself: “What am I doing? Do I yell at him          
                                        …                            
                                          threaten him               
                                                  …                  
                                                    ignore him?”     
      Be honest and look at the efforts you have made to help the child. For the next few
      weeks refrain from doing the things you have on the list that have not been working.
      When you are tempted to use old methods, look at the list and ask yourself: “If they
      didn’t work before, what chance do they have of working now?”  
      Step 2: A New Start                                            
      If you have decided that your present techniques are not working, consider stopping
      these behaviors. Promise yourself that tomorrow, if Jack manifests a problem, you will
      attempt to act as though this is the first time it is occurring. Stay away from such state-
      ments as, “You are doing it again,” or “I have told you a thousand times, stop it.” Do not
      remind him that his behavior is repetitive behavior. If, however, he does something right
      or good, even though he has done it before, reinforce him: “Jack, it’s really neat when
      you sit still,” or “I appreciate that.” A pat on the head, verbal recognition, or an approv-
      ing nod is helpful in telling him he is okay. A fresh start for him, if not for you, may make
      a big difference.                                              
      Step 3: A New Strategy                                         
      Plan at least one thing you could do for Jack that might help him have a better day
      tomorrow. It does not have to be a big deal. This step is based on the adage, “An ounce
      of prevention is worth a pound of cure.” Whatever you do should have a positive aspect,
      such as a pat on the back as soon as he comes in, a special errand, or a “Good to see you,
      Jack.” It can be anything that shows your personal concern for him. Fifteen seconds of
      unexpected recognition can mean a great deal. Commit yourself to these little plans for
      several weeks. The hope is that Jack will get the idea that he has some value in your class.
      Do not expect to be repaid with changed behavior immediately. Jack did not develop
      his problems overnight nor will he become a pillar of responsibility in just a few days.

=== Page 261 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 247
                                                                     
          Initially, he may reject you even more than before. You must stay calm and be persistent.
          Remember, these first three steps are aimed at changing your attitude and strategy.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Steps 4 to 6: Who’s in Control Here?                       
          Step 4: Calm Direction                                     
                                                                     
          Even if you have some success with the first three steps, at some point Jack is going to
          demonstrate the problems again. Perhaps when you ask him to pay attention, he will
          daydream and not respond. Act as if this is the first time he has ever done this (Step 2),
          and ask him to pay attention and begin his assignment. You might also say, “Please stop
          it.” It is hoped that your improved relationship with him through the first three steps
                                                                     
          will now help him to do as you ask and he will focus on the task. If he does not respond,
          walk over to him and help him get started. Do this in a quiet manner, possibly putting
          your hand gently on his shoulder at the same time. At this point, you might say, “Can
          you now do your work?” If he does not agree to do his work, do not give up; you still have
          six steps left. You are trying to establish that although he must take responsibility for not
          doing his work, you are willing to help him get started. If he accepts this, that ends it.
                                                                     
          You are not blaming, yelling, or threatening. If this step works, say nothing more except
          to give him some reinforcement such as, “Jack, I knew you could do it.”
                                                                     
          Step 5: Question Time                                      
          If Step 4 does not work, ask the child one or both of the following two questions:
          “What are you doing?” and “Is what you are doing against the rules?” Often the child
                                                                     
          will say nothing or refuse to answer. If this happens, say, “This is what I say you are
          doing and it is against the rules.” In essence, you are saying that Jack should be doing
          his work. You will have to be insistent. You are telling him that he is breaking a rule.
          Although he might try to evade the issue, you should continue focusing on the rule.
          These questions may be all you need to ask to help him begin working. You may also
          continue by asking, “Can you make a plan to follow the rules?” or “Are you willing to do
          your work?”                                                
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Step 6: Develop a Plan                                     
          Go through Step 5 briefly, and, if it does not work, tell the child in a very firm voice,
          “We have to work this out. We have to make a plan that will help you follow the rules
          or change your behavior.” What you are looking for here is more responsible behavior.
                                                                     
          It will be necessary to make some time available to talk with him about making a plan.
          If it cannot be done immediately, you might say, “We will work it out later.” The time it
          takes to do this is usually much less than the time you spent with procedures that did not
          work. The plan has to be more than “I’m sorry” or “I’ll stop it.” It has to be a doing plan

=== Page 262 (1 cols) ===
248   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      that will help the child move toward more responsible behavior. You might say, “I am
      glad you are sorry, but what are you going to do so it won’t happen again?” The plan
      should be short, specific, and concrete. At first, you may have to put many of your ideas
      into the plan. Gradually, as he does better, the child may make more contributions to
      the plan. In Jack’s case, you might say, “You do not want to do your work, but there are
      rules. Can you make a plan with me so you can get your work done? Let’s try to work it
      out. Why don’t we take some time and talk this over. It doesn’t appear you are having
      much fun and maybe I can help you.” Jack may be quite cautious at first, believing that
      this will just delay his ultimate punishment. Tell him he will not be punished and that
      you would like to help him work it out. Listen to his complaints; talk with him; get to
      know him better. Try not to bring up old behaviors or faults but instead stress that rules
      are important and you believe he can follow them. You may want to put the plan in
      writing; such a contract helps keep the commitment. You are saying to Jack that he has
      the power to make a good plan. Developing a plan does take some time, but it is a lot
      better than the techniques that have failed in the past.       
      Steps 7 to 10: Hope at the End of the Rope                     
      Step 7: Someplace Close                                        
      Assume that Jack still manifests a problem or disrupts again and you are convinced that
      the previous steps will not work. Now it is time for the child to be isolated, or “timed
      out.” The decision for time-out may be made by you or it could have been established
      as a natural consequence at the planning level in Step 6. This isolation is done right
      in the classroom. You need to create a place where the child can sit that is comfortable
      but separate from the class. If this is impossible to do, a desk could be set up in the
      hallway within viewing distance from the door. This conveys to the child that he is
      no longer involved in active participation in the class. The child can listen but cannot
      take part in classroom activities until a plan to follow the rules is worked out with the
      child. The child needs to inform you of the plan and make a commitment to carry it out.
      This plan should be mutually agreed on. If Jack continues his behavior, then say, “Go
      sit over there.” Try not to say anything else. Be firm and quick and send him without
      discussion.Donotbeupsetifhespendshoursormostofthedaythere.Isolationhasaway
      of making the everyday class routines look more attractive. It is important that the child
                                                                     
      learn that rules cannot be broken, and the best way to learn this is through experience.
      You might, when you think Jack has had enough, ask him if he is ready to return to his
      seat and participate. If the answer is yes, at your next break, go over the rules and ask
      him if he has a plan to follow. Remember you are trying to teach him something in a few
      months that he has not learned over a period of many years. If the child continues the
      behavior in isolation, the child’s only alternative is to be excluded, and yours is to move
      to Step 8.

=== Page 263 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 249
                                                                     
          Step 8: Someplace Farther                                  
                                                                     
          In-school suspension is involved in this step. You have tried, you have been patient, but
          now you have had enough. At this step, there are no questions to be asked. You can
          make this statement, “Jack, things did not work out for you here. We have both tried
          hard to work out the problems but now it is time for you to spend time outside the
          class and maybe talk with some other people. Please report to the Counselor’s office [or
                                                                     
          the Principal’s office, or the in-school suspension room].” The room or place should be
          staffed by a person who can get the following idea across to the child: “We want you in
          school and class but we expect you to follow the rules. When you have a plan as to how
          you can return to class and follow the rules, let me know. If you need help carrying out
          the plan, let me know and I will help you.” What you want to get across to the child is
          that the plan will be different and better than what was used in the past. To get Jack to
          change his behavior is the task for which a new environment as well as new approaches
                                                                     
          are necessary. Do not be concerned if he sits there for a time. The whole idea is used to
          reduce the alternatives to two choices: (1) to be in class and behave, or (2) to be out
          of class and sit. It is hoped that the class will begin to look better. The point that needs
          to be communicated to the child is, “Follow reasonable rules, or you are out.” However,
          while he is out, you are not going to hurt or reject the child, which would let the child
          rationalize his behavior on the basis of his dislike for you. This kind of nonpunitive place
          may be hard for the school and you, the teacher, to accept, but review Step 1 again—you
                                                                     
          can see the child has been in the “old” place a long time with no results. Be ready for a lot
          ofexcusesfromthe child;followthemupwith,“Butyoucannotgobackto classuntilyou
          have a plan.” When more than one day is required, you should notify Jack’s parents that
          their child is not in class. It may well be that 3 days to a week or more will be required.
          Perhaps the child’s schoolwork will suffer (although he could do schoolwork while in
          in-school suspension). It is hoped that the child will learn one of the most important
          things that can be learned: Children must be responsible for their own behavior and
                                                                     
          they do have the choice to behave in a way helpful to themselves and others.
                                                                     
          Step 9: A Day Off                                          
          If Jack cannot be handled in an in-school suspension, the parents should be notified
          and asked to take the child home. The child will now be put on “a day off” with the
                                                                     
          idea that he can return the following day. One could say, “We would like your child
          to return, but we must maintain reasonable behavior. If his behavior goes beyond the
          rules, he will have to go home again.” This means that Jack starts again at Step 8, or at
          in-school suspension, and can stay until his behavior changes for the better or until he
          reaches Step 9 again. If the child cannot be helped in school at all, then he will have
          to stay home, which means either having a tutor at home or the school’s proceeding
          to Step 10.

=== Page 264 (1 cols) ===
250   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Step 10: Someplace Else                                        
      If Jack is continually unsuccessful in Step 9, he should stay home and be referred to
      some other community agency. This may sound tough, but it may take something like
      this to jolt the child into taking some responsibility for his behavior. If the child is
      in jail or juvenile detention, perhaps he could return to school for a day to see if he
      can make it, but not unless a specific plan and commitment have been made to follow
      the rules.                                                     
      PARENTING  SKILLS                                              
      A Parent Involvement Program (PIP) has been designed to help parents gain the neces-
      sary reality therapy skills (McGuiness, 1977). Many of the activities demonstrate ways
      to facilitate increased involvement with one’s children. Other aspects of the program
      attempt to teach parents better listening skills and to reflect to their children the good
      they see in them.                                              
        Theprogramisaccomplishedinsix3-hoursessions,whichcanbeconductedonweek-
      ends or evenings during the week. Each of the sessions has a definite content to provide
      parents with knowledge about a skill to be used in dealing with their children. The ses-
      sions are based on practice after they receive the theory. The sessions are structured to
      allow the parents to personalize the ideas, share their concerns, and develop a plan to
      improve things at home.                                        
        TheobjectivesoftheprogramforeachsessioncontainedintheIdeaBookfortheParent
      Involvement Program (McGuiness, 1977) are outlined in Table 7.2.
        The parents are involved in a number of activities including:
                                                                     
         1. Viewing films and listening to tapes that include:       
           a. Identity Society.                                      
           b. Reality of Success.                                    
         2. Using worksheets that include:                           
                                                                     
           a. Reality therapy planning form.                         
           b. Questions to accompany “Success-Oriented Home Exercises.”
         3. Reading articles such as:                                
           a. “Basic Principles in Dealing with Children.”           
           b. “How to Drive Your Child Sane.”                        
           c. “Rules, Goals, and Failure.”                           
                                                                     
           d. “Your Child and Discipline.”                           
         4. Discussing ideas in small and large groups.              
         5. Making personal plans to meet the needs of the family.   
         6. Participating in role playing to allow for practice of what is being presented.

=== Page 265 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 251
                                                                     
          Table 7.2 Parent Involvement Program                       
                                                                     
          Lesson Objectives              Topics Covered              
          1. To build trust and support among group members.         
           To help parents understand the cultural shift that has    
           occurred since World War II.                              
          To help parents understand these cultural changes are      
           affecting their relationship with their children.         
                                         Group involvement.          
                                         The Identity Society role versus
                                           goal-activities.          
          2. To help parents realize the importance of building warm 
           personal, friendly relationships with their children.     
          To help parents understand a problem-solving approach      
           (reality therapy) to helping children become responsible. 
                                         Importance of involvement.  
                                         Successful versus failing identities.
                                         Principles of reality therapy.
          3. To give parents insights that will help them reflect to 
           their children the goodness and beauty that they see in   
           them.                                                     
          To share with parents ideas that enhance total family      
           involvement and help create a success-filled atmosphere   
           for the home.                                             
          To develop with the parents a personal plan that           
           incorporates the concepts basic to reality therapy.       
                                         Practice in using steps of reality therapy.
                                         Total family involvement.   
                                         How to increase involvement at home.
          4. To share successes and concerns based on the activities 
           developed from each parent’s personal plan.               
                                          Successful experiences.    
                                         Communication.              
                                         Components of good listening.
          5. To help parents improve their communication skills.     
           To clarify any misconceptions concerning the              
           understanding and use of the basic steps of reality       
           therapy.                                                  
          To expose parents to current authors who have written      
           significant articles in the area of parent-child          
           relationships.                                            
                                          Nonverbal communication.   
                                         One-way versus two-way communication.
                                         Discipline techniques.      
          6. To help parents gain insights in working with their     
           children, based on articles read and shared with each     
           other.                                                    
          To help parents clarify for themselves the basic concepts  
           introduced and to share with their families the spirit of 
           the workshop.                                             
                                          Review and feedback.       
            W. Glasser (2011) in his book titled Take Charge of Your Life, devotes an entire
          chapter on how choice theory can be used in raising children. He suggests that there
          are basically only two ways for the parent to deal with a problem situation; negotiate
          and/or compromise. He suggests using the following four steps:
            1. Check the picture in your head of what you want from the child or adolescent
              and be sure what you want is also reasonably satisfying for the child or adoles-
              cent. If the rule is broken, be sure it is reasonable, which means it is one that

=== Page 266 (1 cols) ===
252   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
           most children would follow and that you would be willing to follow as a child or
           adolescent.                                               
         2. Try to wait until both of you have calmed down, and then, with demonstrating as
           little anger as possible from you in the situation, ask the children or adolescents if
           they are satisfied with what they are doing or if they understand that it is against
           the rules.                                                
         3. When the children or adolescents are not satisfied or admit to breaking a rule,
           negotiate a better way for them to satisfy themselves and you. If you are involved
           in this plan, make sure that what you do is as much with and as little to or for the
           children or adolescents as possible. It is better when they can carry out the plan
           by themselves.                                            
         4. Whenthechildrenclaimtobesatisfiedwithwhattheyaredoinganddonotwant
           to change, then, if you have the power, invoke a sanction that does not cause the
           childrentolosecontrol.Thesanctionisalwayssomelossofaprivilegeorfreedom
           until the problem is worked out. Make sure that the children or adolescents are
           able to change; if they need help, offer instructions or arrange for outside help,
           but do not do it for the children. Whatever the loss, it should be appropriate
           for the individuals’ age and long enough for the children to see some sense in
           negotiating. It should not be so long that they give up and do not try to correct
           the situation.                                            
      FAMILY INTERVENTIONS                                           
      Reality therapy does not at present offer a framework for family therapy in the tradi-
      tional sense. Family therapies usually identify the family as the client and do not focus
      on an individual, identified client. In family therapies, the focus is on systems, rela-
      tionships, structures, and interdependencies. Reality therapy emphasizes developing the
      individual’s successful identity and encouraging personal responsibility.
        The family therapy focus on environmental influences on behavior is somewhat at
                                                                     
      odds with reality therapy. Family therapy views individual problems as stemming from a
      dysfunctional family system or structure, whereas reality therapy views individual prob-
      lems as resulting more from individual identity and choices. Thus, the two approaches
      are not entirely compatible.                                   
        The reality therapist, however, does have some tools to use with problems that have
      family components. The first is the Parent Involvement Program, previously described.
                                                                     
      This allows work with families where problems seem centered on a need for more
      parental involvement with children and a need for the parents to provide more positive
      feedback to their children. The second tool is marital therapy or conjoint marital
      counseling (W. Glasser & Zunin, 1979), to be used when the family problems seem to

=== Page 267 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 253
                                                                     
          be a result of marital discord. This type of therapy is often time-limited, usually 5 to
          15 sessions. This marriage counseling begins by clarifying the couple’s goals in seeking
                                                                     
          counseling. Questions would be directed at determining whether the goal is, on the one
          hand, to continue in the marriage or, on the other hand, to attempt a last-ditch effort
          to save the marriage even though a decision to end it has already been made. Attention
          would also be focused on defining the couple’s similarities and differences in opinion
          and interest, on how the couple seeks friends and other activities, and how much the
          couple actually knows, as opposed to assumes, about each other. The overall goal is
          intimacy, not simply familiarity.                          
                                                                     
                                                                     
          EFFICACY                                                   
                                                                     
          There are numerous favorable books on reality therapy, two published casebooks
          (N. Glasser, 1980, 1989), a survey of Glasser’s work (Bassin, Bratter, & Rachin, 1976),
          and a compendium of articles on reality therapy (Litwack, 1994). In addition, seven
                                                                     
          books have been written by Ford and others (Ford, 1974, 1987, 1989, 1994; Ford &
          Englund, 1977, 1979; Ford & Zorn, 1975) that discuss the techniques and principles of
          reality therapy as applied to discipline, raising children, marriage, loneliness, and stress.
          A book by Robert (1973) discusses the use of reality therapy in the school situation
          to deal with loneliness. Wubbolding (1988, 1991, 2000, 2011) has written four very
          useful books demonstrating the practical uses of reality therapy. Good (1992) proposed
          a nontraditional approach to communicating with children for parents and teachers
                                                                     
          using the principles of reality therapy as the framework for her ideas. Gossen (1992)
          presents in detail how restitution, a key approach to discipline, is used in reality therapy.
          Crawford, Bodine, and Hoglund (1993) proposed a number of changes for schools to
          be successful. Their book introduced an agenda for transformation by addressing the
          multiple issues that a school must consider in order to move toward being a school
          for quality learning. They drew heavily on the teachings of William Glasser. Myers
                                                                     
          and Jackson (2002) present a book that is based on implementing reality therapy in a
          juvenile facility. A major theme in the book is to help juveniles make better choices and
          to help them improve their relationships with others. It is a specific “how to” workbook
          that explains what to do clearly in a correctional situation. Erwin (2004) offers many
          useful management and instructional tips to teachers based on reality therapy. He offers
          hundreds of specific strategies one can use with students to appeal to what intrinsically
          motivates them in order for appropriate learning to take place. The book focuses on
                                                                     
          a new classroom management model that aligns itself with what motivates a student’s
          behavior. A book by Jackson (2005) focuses on violent girls who bully. He presents
          14 chapters dealing with the problems of female bullies and their victims and what
          can be done about the problem. Throughout the book it is demonstrated how he uses

=== Page 268 (1 cols) ===
254   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      choice theory and reality therapy to build relationships with three different girls and for
      them to choose more effective behaviors.                       
        The methods and techniques of reality therapy and their justification appear reason-
      able and have been accepted by many professionals in the field. Reality therapy follows
      certain tenets in attaining involvement and influencing responsible, realistic behavior:
         • Becoming involved—personalization.                        
         • Concentrating on the here and now.                        
         • Emphasizing behavior.                                     
         • Refraining from asking why.                               
         • Helping the client evaluate behavior.                     
         • Developing a different or better plan of behavior.        
         • Refusing to accept excuses.                               
         • Never punishing, only disciplining.                       
         • Offering little sympathy.                                 
         • Approving and praising responsible behavior.              
         • Never giving up.                                          
        There certainly is no lack of testimony concerning the efficacy of reality therapy.
      However,inthesebooksthereisnoadequatestatisticalevidenceorsupportforreliability
      andvalidity.W.GlasserandZunin(1973)reportedtherehadbeennolong-termresearch
      on the effectiveness of reality therapy with outpatients. Follow-up work at the Ventura
      School for Girls, however, indicated that the use of reality therapy in the treatment
      program had reduced the recidivism rate for that environment (W. Glasser & Zunin,
      1973).                                                         
        Radtke, Sapp, and Farrell (1997) performed a meta-analysis of 21 studies using reality
      therapy and found the 95% confidence interval for the population effect to be
                                                        −            
                                                         .072        
      (lower limit) and .808 (upper limit). This suggests that reality therapy may or may not
      be helpful. They found that reality therapy had some positive application mainly for
      school-based issues. The power value for the 95% confidence interval was .38, suggesting
      low power overall. The authors indicated that additional meta-analysis, experimental
      and quasi-experimental studies were needed.                    
        Murphy (1997) did a search of PsycLit from 1980 to 1995 on the efficacy of reality
      therapy in the schools. The author found six studies that had been conducted regarding
      reality therapy in the schools. She concluded that to one degree or another reality ther-
      apy was effective. However, it was pointed out that these studies lacked experimental
      control in many areas. Included here were issues of voluntary participation, measures
      used, sample size, length of intervention, and training of teachers. Overall this may sug-
      gest that reality therapy may be working to improve behavior in the schools, but because
      of the lack of sound research, there is little to substantiate its efficacy.

=== Page 269 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 255
                                                                     
            Some studies have focused on classroom meetings and their effect on self-concept,
          social adjustment, locus of control, and achievement. Matthews (1972) studied the
                                                                     
          effect of class meetings on the discipline, self-concept, social adjustment, and read-
          ing achievement of 221 fourth and fifth graders. Treatment consisted of 16 weeks of
          a language arts program in the control group and reality therapy in the experimental
          group. Pretreatment and posttreatment data were collected on three tests. His findings
          indicated that both treatments increased self-concept scores but neither change was sig-
          nificant. It was also found that neither treatment was significantly better in improving
          social adjustment. However, reality therapy was found to be significantly more effective
                                                                     
          in lowering the incidence of discipline problems in the experimental group compared
          with the control group.                                    
            Zeeman and Martucci (1976) utilized an open-ended classroom meeting over a
          school year in a special education class of nine learning disabled 10- to 11-year-olds.
          As the school year progressed the authors reported that verbal participation increased,
          while impulsive behavior and hyperactivity decreased. They also suggested that
                                                                     
          these meetings were especially helpful in enabling “isolated” children to develop
          the “success identity” necessary to draw them into positive relationships with other
          children.                                                  
            Hunter (1973) reported no significant findings when studying the effects of reality
          therapy and Rogerian group sessions on math achievement, self-concept, and behavior
          of 40 fifth-grade students. The students were matched on sex and randomly assigned to a
          math remediation, a Rogerian discussion, a reality therapy, or a control group. Six weeks
                                                                     
          of treatment (twelve 40-minute sessions per group) resulted in no significant change in
          math achievement, self-esteem, or behavior in any of the groups.
            Tangeman (1973) investigated the effects of a reality therapy program on the achieve-
          ment and self-esteem of 93 third graders. Four classrooms were randomly assigned to two
          treatment approaches: (1) reality therapy class meetings and (2) Developing Under-
          standing of Self and Others (DUSO) and two control groups. Twenty 30-minute meet-
          ings were held for each group over a 10-week period. Pretest and posttest data from two
                                                                     
          tests were analyzed. The results indicated no significant changes for any of the groups on
          self-concept or achievement.                               
            Hawes (1971) evaluated the use of reality therapy on the locus of control, self-
          concept, and classroom behavior of 340 third- and sixth-grade Black students. Three
          tests were administered for pretest and posttest evaluation. Reality therapy class
          meetings were employed for a 16-week period, with a control group receiving no
                                                                     
          treatment. The results showed that the reality therapy program did significantly shift
          the children’s belief system toward an internal orientation. A significant change in
          behavior was also found, as the reality therapy group demonstrated more appropriate
          changes on the self-concept measure.

=== Page 270 (1 cols) ===
256   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        Shearn and Randolph (1978) evaluated the effect of reality therapy class meetings on
      self-concept and on-task behavior for fourth-grade children. In an attempt to construct
      a “true placebo control” design, the authors randomly assigned four intact classes
      (27 students in each) into four treatment conditions: (1) pretested reality therapy,
      (2) unpretested reality therapy, (3) pretested placebo (career education activities),
      and (4) unpretested placebo (career education). Several tests were administered to all
      the groups. Pretest and posttest scores were collected for one experimental and one
      placebo group, while only posttest scores were collected for the other experimental and
      control group. The results indicated that treatment, pretesting, or the interaction of
      treatment and pretesting for posttest scores had any significant effect on self-concept or
      on-task behavior. The authors concluded that their findings do not support using reality
      therapy in the classroom. They did caution that the inability to measure the effects of
      reality therapy empirically in the classroom is a factor that confounds interpretation of
      research in this area.                                         
        Quinn (1979) used seventh- and eighth-grade children to investigate the effects
      of class meetings on self-concept and attitude toward school. Three seventh- and
      eighth-grade classes were randomly assigned, each to one of the following groups:
      (1) class meetings, (2) a quasi-experimental group (performing plays), or (3) a control
      group (no treatment). Pretest and posttest scores were collected on self-concept and
      school attitudinal scales. The results failed to demonstrate any significant changes in
      self-concept or improved attitude toward school. Here nonsignificant results may have
      been a function of insufficient time for behavioral changes to occur.
        A study by Grant (1972) used open-ended class meetings to investigate possible
      changes in self-concept and locus of control of 163 fourth-grade pupils. Classrooms
      were randomly assigned as open-ended classroom meetings. Each treatment group met
      in twenty-nine 30-minute meetings over a 6-week period. All children were rated by
      their teachers prior to the treatment on a rating scale as either “normal” (N
                                                      =              
                                                        78) or       
      “deviant” (N                                                   
               =                                                     
                85). Results of the study demonstrated that the class meetings influenced
      self-concept somewhat, but had little influence on locus of control. The only significant
      changes in locus of control occurred in experimental students who had been rated as
      “deviants” by their teachers. Students in the normal group accepted responsibility for
      failure much more than did the deviant-rated control students. The author concluded
      that, in general, the open-ended class meetings were of little value in effecting change
      in self-concept or locus of control.                           
        Rosario (1973) measured the effects of reality therapy group counseling on college
      students by means of the Nowicki-Strickland Internal-External Scale. The author
      predicted that extremely external students would show very little change of control
      orientation, extremely internal students would become slightly less internal, and
      moderately internal-external students would benefit most from class meetings. A pretest

=== Page 271 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 257
                                                                     
          and posttest model, with a follow-up testing 5 months after completion of treatment,
          was used. Results of the analysis of data for the initial posttest indicated that no
                                                                     
          significant shift was found for high internals, high externals, or those rated moderately
          internal-external. After the 5-month follow-up, results indicated that extremely
          external students did shift toward a more internal stance. The author thought that
          the change in locus of control for the external males may have been the result of
          attitude change based on the practice of the behaviors. The study had a number of
          shortcomings, including the absence of quasi-experimental and control groups. In
          addition, the use of 10 therapists allowed for uncontrolled variability in application of
                                                                     
          reality therapy techniques.                                
            English (1970) also focused on the use of reality therapy (counseling) in various
          school environments. He demonstrated that reality therapy was an effective method
          for reducing disciplinary problems, increasing school achievement, and improving
          teacher-teacher and teacher-student interactions.          
            Marandola and Imber (1979) evaluated the effects of classroom meetings on
                                                                     
          the argumentative behavior (verbal and physical) of 10 preadolescent, inner-city,
          learning-disabled children. Both open-ended and problem-solving classroom meetings
          were used. During the intervention period, classroom meetings were used daily for
          8 days with the focus always related to argumentative behavior in the classroom.
          Three types of behavior were used for analysis: (1) verbal argument between two
          classmates, (2) verbal argument involving two or more classmates, and (3) physical
          confrontation between two classmates. The results of the study provided strong support
                                                                     
          for the classroom meeting and its role in behavior change. Appropriate behaviors for
          positive interactions were maintained, and inappropriate argumentative behaviors were
          sharply decreased as a result of the class meetings. The study had some limitations: 9 of
          the 10 children had been with the teacher for 2 years, and strong rapport had been
          established between teacher and students. The children were also accustomed to having
          discussions, although they were not the same as Glasser’s class meetings.
            Poppen and Welch (1976) utilized reality therapy with 16 overweight adolescent girls
                                                                     
          who volunteered to participate in a weight-loss program. The subjects were evaluated
          by pretesting and posttesting with a self-concept scale. The treatment program lasted for
          6 weeks. The results of the study indicated that reality therapy was effective in producing
          a significant weight loss; however, no significant changes in self-concept were detected.
            Hough-Waite (1980) compared the effectiveness of the Parent Involvement Program
          with a behavioral program entitled the “Art of Parenting.” A group of untreated
                                                                     
          controls was also included. Participants in treatment groups were 19 randomly assigned
          parents who volunteered to participate in a parent education group. Eight were
          assigned to the Art of Parenting Program, and 11 to the Parent Involvement Program.
          The control group consisted of 14 parents randomly selected from a large population.

=== Page 272 (1 cols) ===
258   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      A Child-Rearing Practices Questionnaire was administered before and after training,
      which lasted 6 weeks. The results indicated that neither treatment group differed
      significantly from the controls or from each other. Some factors could have confounded
      the results, including small sample size, lack of a sensitive outcome measure, and the
      use of volunteers as subjects.                                 
        Bigelow and Thorne (1979) compared client-centered and reality therapy techniques
      in group counseling at the elementary school level. One group contained six children
      and the other eight. All children were volunteers for a summer remedial reading pro-
      gram. Six group counseling sessions were conducted with both groups. The Hill Inter-
      action Matrix was administered before and after the six sessions. The results indicated
      that the reality therapy group performed more efficiently than did the client-centered
      group in that significantly more therapeutic group member interactions were elicited
      by reality therapy techniques. It was also concluded that a counselor can direct an
      elementary-school age group into defined work areas and maintain it there more rapidly
      using a reality-oriented counseling approach.                  
        Baskin and Hess (1980) conducted a review of seven affective education programs,
      one of which was Schools without Failure. In the area of self-esteem, the authors cited
      a 2-year evaluation of Schools without Failure in Grades 1 through 6, which found no
      significant impact on self-esteem but did find that the frequency of discipline referrals to
      the principal decreased with the implementation of the Schools without Failure program.
      It was also reported that no differences were found between treatment and control group
      achievement levels. The authors also discussed the methodological difficulties inherent
      to evaluating a program such as Schools without Failure and reality therapy.
        Omizo and Cubberly (1983) studied 60 learning-disabled students, aged 12 to 24, who
      were assigned to experimental and control conditions. The students in the experimen-
      tal group were exposed to discussions (e.g., obstacles to academic success) by teachers
      trained in reality therapy. Multivariate analysis revealed that the students in the exper-
      imental group attained higher academic aspirations and lower anxiety levels than those
      in the control group.                                          
        Yarish (1986) studied 45 male juvenile offenders (aged 12 to 16 years) to determine
      whether positive perceptual changes could be brought about by the application of reality
      therapy. The Nowicki-Strickland Locus of Control Scale for Children was administered
      to subjects during their first and last week in a treatment facility. A significant difference
      was found between the treatment and control groups. The subjects who received reality
      therapy moved in an internal direction and chose to behave better with control of their
      fate in their own hands. Subjects were treated for an average of 4 months.
        Hart-Hester (1986) studied five fourth-grade students who exhibited behavioral
      problems such as noncompliance, aggressiveness, off-task behavior, and absenteeism.
      She tried to improve several targeted behaviors (i.e., on-task behavior, peer interactions,

=== Page 273 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 259
                                                                     
          and student-teacher interactions) through the use of reality therapy. Using anecdotal
          reports from the school principal, classroom teacher, and independent observation by
                                                                     
          investigation, the data indicated that reality therapy increased on-task behavior but
          not peer interactions or student-teacher interaction.      
            Tamborella (1987) investigated how troubled adolescents responded to the use of
          reality therapy procedures in a structured alternative school environment. Twenty
          students and six staff members were involved in the study. Evaluation was accomplished
          by using in-depth interview schedules, student permanent records, student attendance
          reports, student suspension reports, and the Statements about Schools Inventory.
                                                                     
          The results indicated that the use of reality therapy techniques that govern the types
          of student-teacher interactions in the alternative school program are effective in
          producing increased attendance and decreased rates of suspension. Students and staff
          experienced positive changes in self-perception, and students had positive perceptions
          regarding personal and academic needs satisfaction. It was demonstrated that significant
          and positive change in students and staff can be brought about through the impact of
                                                                     
          reality therapy.                                           
            Gorter-Cass (1988) evaluated an alternative school for disruptive junior high school
          youth. Program staffs were trained in reality therapy techniques. The results indicated
          that the initial steps of reality therapy were successfully delivered. Significant changes
          were found in identity, personal self-worth, family-self, and total self-concept. The later
          and more specific steps of reality therapy dealing with assuming responsibility and plan-
          ning and carrying out behaviors were not successfully carried out. The behavioral out-
                                                                     
          come goals established by the steps of reality therapy were not achieved. However, a
          trend toward less severe behavior was demonstrated.        
            Bean (1988) investigated whether reality therapy could produce significant positive
          outcomes with community-based, male juvenile offenders. Changes were measured by
          recidivism rates and locus of control. The Nowicki-Strickland Locus of Control for Chil-
          dren was used to measure locus of control. Seventy-two offenders, aged 14 to 17, were
          randomlyassignedtorealitytherapy,communityservice,Crossroads,orprobationcondi-
                                                                     
          tions. The recidivism rate for reality therapy was significantly lower than the recidivism
          rate of the Crossroads condition. There were no overall significant differences between
          groupsorpretestorposttestlocusofcontrolmeasures.However,therealitytherapygroup
          demonstrated significantly more internal locus of control than the Crossroads group on
          an individualposttest pairwise comparison. The study concludedthat reality therapy was
          the most effective in reducing recidivism rates. Reality therapy also appeared to affect
                                                                     
          locus of control significantly.                            
            A study by Allen (1990) examined the efficacy of group counseling using reality
          therapy and a study skills program with at-risk students in the fifth and sixth grades.
          The children were evaluated on general self-esteem, behavioral academic self-esteem,

=== Page 274 (1 cols) ===
260   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      grades, and attendance. Ninety children from two elementary schools were assigned ran-
      domly to one of three groups: (1) reality therapy (N           
                                      =                              
                                       30), (2) study skill (N       
                                                     =               
                                                      30), and       
      (3) no treatment (N                                            
                    =                                                
                     30). The groups were seen for 45 minutes twice a week over
      a 6-week period. Pretest and posttest measures included the Coopersmith Self-Esteem
      Inventory, Behavioral Academic Self-Esteem Rating Scale, academic grades, and atten-
      dance rates. There were no significant results for general self-esteem, academic grades,
      and attendance between reality therapy and study skill treatment groups. There was
      also no significant difference in the outcome of the four measures between the treat-
      ment groups and the control group. The reality therapy group failed to demonstrate a
      significant effect at the end of the 6-week treatment period.  
        Coats (1991) studied the impact of reality therapy on teacher attitudes and the
      behavior of emotionally disturbed children. Thirty-three students (aged 5 to 14 years)
      with severe emotional and behavioral disabilities, who were attending a special school,
      were used in this study. The children’s behavior was measured by using staff interviews
      and examination of student behavior logs for the 1991/1992 school year. The findings
      indicated that reality therapy contributed in reducing the frequency of severe student
      behaviors. The majority of teachers interviewed perceived reality therapy as having
      a positive impact on student behavior. For example, seclusionary time-outs showed a
      marked reduction over the school year.                         
        Harris (1992) assessed the use of reality therapy as part of an adolescent pregnancy
      prevention program. Two groups of 27 students were randomly selected to participate in
      the study. One group received reality therapy-based instruction whereas the other group
      served as the control. Measures of self-esteem, locus of control, and decision-making
      skills were used as predictors of responsible behavior. There was a significant increase on
      self-esteem for both groups with no significant difference on locus of control. Students
      who participated in the reality therapy group were able to distinguish between respon-
      sible and irresponsible behaviors. Most of the students reported that the reality therapy
      approach was beneficial in helping them choose responsible behaviors.
        The purpose of a study by Kunze (1992) was to determine whether group counseling
      would improve the achievement (grade-point average), self-concept, and locus of con-
      trol of students in an alternative educational program. Sixty-six ninth-grade students
      were assigned on a random basis to a treatment or control group. Subjects in the treat-
      ment group participated in ten 45-minute group counseling sessions over a 4-month
      period. Reality therapy techniques were used with an emphasis on goal setting, decision
      making, and problem-solving skills. There were no significant findings to support group
      counseling using reality therapy.                              
        Block (1995) studied the use of reality therapy in small group sessions to improve the
      self-conceptoffifth-andsixth-gradestudents.Thestudentswereplacedintwotreatment
      groups each led by a different group leader. There were seven students in each group.

=== Page 275 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 261
                                                                     
          The groups met for six 45-minute sessions over a 6-week period. The basic principles
          and techniques of reality therapy were used to enhance self-concept. A control group
                                                                     
          was also included in the study. The Piers-Harris Children’s Self-Concept Scale was given
          before and after treatment to all three groups. The results indicated reality therapy, when
          applied in small group sessions, was effective in increasing the overall self-concept of
          upper elementary aged students. It was also found that using different group leaders had
          no significant effect on the outcome for the two experimental groups.
            Wicker (2000) conducted a study to determine if significant differences existed in
          the reported menstrual distress of African American high school females who received
                                                                     
          reality therapy counseling as compared to females who did not receive treatment.
          The 49 participants were 11th- and 12th-grade students from a small, inner-city school.
          Menstrual distress was measured by the Menstrual Distress Questionnaire (MDQ).
          The study was a quasi-experimental one utilizing a pretest-posttest control and treat-
          ment group design. The treatment group participated in an 8-week curriculum using
          reality therapy group counseling. The sessions focused on the students’ total behaviors
                                                                     
          such as thinking, acting, feeling, and physiology. An ANCOVA was run on adjusted
          posttest MDQ scores with no statistical differences. Both groups reported reductions in
          menstrual distress, however, when the differences in pretest and posttest scores were
          analyzed for each group, neither group showed significant gains.
            Lewis (2002) investigated whether a course that was based on reality therapy impacts
          classroom teachers’ perceived effectiveness in responding to disruptive behavior. Infor-
          mation was collected by using a survey with three groups of teachers who had completed
                                                                     
          a course in reality therapy and had implemented the techniques of reality therapy in
          their classrooms for at least a year. The results indicated the majority of teachers felt
          more confident about their ability to develop their own proactive discipline program.
          The author concluded that teachers who have received training on reality therapy have
          more confidence in dealing with students who have disruptive behaviors. The teachers
          also noted improvement in student behavior and attendance. However, the study lacked
          a control group and only reported percentages with no statistical information to back up
                                                                     
          the claims the teachers made.                              
            A study by Petra (2001) evaluated the effects of a choice theory and reality therapy
          parenting program on children’s behavior as measured by the Behavior Assessment Sys-
          tem for Children (BASC), Parent Stress Index (PSI), and behavior referrals (BR) to
          the school counselor. Parents were included in the study if (a) their child was referred
          to the school counselor three or more times for one or more of the following: defiance,
                                                                     
          unsafe behavior, property damage, and verbal and physical abuse toward others, and
          (b) they requested to be in the study. Forty-five parents from one elementary school
          were randomly assigned to one of three groups: Group 1 received 13 hours of the par-
          enting program with reality therapy in individual sessions; Group 2 received 13 hours of

=== Page 276 (1 cols) ===
262   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      the parenting program with no reality therapy in group sessions; and Group 3 received
      no special materials or therapy. The groups were analyzed using an ANOVA and Bonfer-
      roni Test of Multiple Comparisons. The results suggested that both programs improved
      the children’s behavior at home and at school. The 13 hours was sufficient time to
      significantly improve children’s behavior.                     
        Yarbrough and Thompson (2002) researched the efficacy of reality therapy with ele-
      mentary school children engaging in off-task behavior. The participants were two chil-
      dren from a suburban elementary school. One was an 8-year-old African American male
      who was in the third grade and a 9-year-old Caucasian female enrolled in the fourth
      grade. Specific goals related to classroom behavior and assignment completion were
      developed for the study. Goal attainment scales were used to track the students’ progress
      relative to their baseline rates on completion of their assignments. An AB design was
      used with goal attainment scaling which included repeated behavior measurements in
      a time-series format over 8 weeks. Baseline data were gathered during the first 3 weeks
      of the study followed by 5 weeks of the treatment phase. The results supported reality
      therapy for working with off-task behavior. The initial baseline scores were well below
      the mean score of 50 for goal attainment scaling. It appeared that reality enabled the
      two children to set specific goals, track their progress, and experience a positive change
      in behavior and in their classroom performance. The authors reported that one child’s
      final score was 75 and the other’s 66.                         
        A study by Harvey and Retter (2002) compared the profiles of 402 children and
      adolescents age 8 through 16 on the Basic Needs Survey, which measures the relative
      strength of Glasser’s four psychological needs (i.e., control and power, fun, freedom,
      and love and belonging) for variations by gender. Results indicated that adolescents
      expressed a significant higher need for Love and Belonging, and a significant lesser need
      for Fun than young girls. Adolescents expressed a higher significant need for Freedom
      and a significant lower need for Power and Control than latency-aged children. The
      results of this study demonstrated that developmental and gender differences in drives
      to meet the basic psychological needs depicted by Glasser need to be taken into consid-
      eration for therapy and curriculum planning.                   
        Passaro, Moon, Wiest, and Wong (2004) studied whether several measurable
      behavioral changes would occur as a result of the use of reality therapy and an in-school
      support room. Ten males in grades six through eight participated in the study. Each stu-
      dent met the State of California Education Code criteria for an emotional disturbance.
      The variables evaluated were positive changes in average daily behavior over a school
      year; reductions in the number of out-of-school suspensions compared to the previous
      school year; and increases in the number of times students participate in general educa-
      tion courses compared to the previous school year and within the current school year.
      The daily behavior of students in the study was assessed using a 4-point Likert scale.

=== Page 277 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 263
                                                                     
          Behaviors typically included were, compliance, task completion, and verbal/and or
          physical aggression. The results provided positive indicators for the use of reality therapy
                                                                     
          and the in-school support room. In general, the average daily behavior ratings improved
          on average by 42% over the school year. At the start of the school year, average student
          behavior assessed by staff as being in the lowest range 36% of the time, while average
          student behavior reached the highest level (excellent) only 19% of the time. However,
          after one semester this trend was reversed. At the end of the school year, average student
          behavior was assessed in the highest range 38% of the time, while average student
          behavior was reported in the lowest level (poor) only 13% of the time. The amount
                                                                     
          of time spent in general education increased to over 62%. The out-of-school sus-
          pensions decreased by 12% from the previous school year. However, there was no
          control group, only percentages were reported, and the number of participants
          was small.                                                 
            Lord (2005) studied the effect that choice theory/reality therapy would have on
          increasing high school students’ perceived satisfaction in the four basic principles of
                                                                     
          reality—belonging, power, freedom, and fun—and how these needs affected behavioral
          change. A quasi-experimental, nonrandomized pretest/posttest design was used. For five
          sessions, the treatment group received information about the principles of choice
          theory. After the first posttest, the control group also received information about choice
          theory. A second posttest was administered to each group. A 2
                                                 ×                   
                                                   3 repeated measures
          ANOVA was conducted on all the data of the 4 psychological needs after the second
          exposure. Significance was obtained on students’ perception of needs in three of the
          four psychological needs. Interviews were conducted with students from the treatment
          group, whose satisfaction scores significantly increased at the .05 level, in at least one of
          the four psychological needs. The interviews suggested that exposure to choice theory
          principles influenced the student’s perception.            
            Hale (2011) examined if 42second grade students who were taught by teachers
          trained in choice/reality therapy techniques would score higher on achievement scores
          in mathematics/reading when compared to 42 students who were taught by teachers
          who were not trained. An ANOVA was conducted to measure the main effect of
          achievement in mathematics/reading and training status of teachers. There was no
          significance found between the two groups of teachers. The teacher training was only
          6 hours and the study did not offer follow-up training.    
            The purpose of a study by Austin (2013) was to examine the influence of Effective
          Teens training on the attendance, discipline referrals, and academic achievement of
                                                                     
          10th grade students. The theoretical framework of the study was choice theory, which
          uses reality therapy as its basic method. The study included 96 Grade 10 students in
          one rural high school that involved a 3-week counselor-led program. A pre- posttest
          control group design was used to determine if there was significance between the

=== Page 278 (1 cols) ===
264   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      treatment and control groups on discipline referrals, attendance, and achievement.
      An analysis of covariance indicated there were significant differences in outcomes based
      on the treatment.                                              
        The results discussed in this section that dealt with actual research studies included
      33 articles or theses. In fact, the majority were doctoral dissertations. The articles that
      were in journals were mostly from the Journal of Reality Therapy. Most of this research
      has been done with group or class meetings. These findings indicated mixed results
      for self-concept, achievement, and locus of control. However, a number of the studies
      showed significant decreases in behavior problems.             
        There were 14 studies that used reality therapy in a counseling or classroom situa-
      tion rather than as part of a class meeting. These studies demonstrated that the ther-
      apy process significantly decreased behavioral problems, aided weight loss, increased
      attendance, lowered recidivism, and decreased rate of suspension. The findings were
      contradictory for self-concept, locus of control, and achievement.
        The preceding studies share the usual methodological problems encountered when
      the effectiveness of therapeutic approaches is evaluated. It is very difficult to measure
      items such as involvement, happiness, fulfillment, and successful identity.
        The four greatest problems in evaluating reality therapy, class meetings, and other
      therapies are the following, as discussed by Baskin and Hess (1980):
         1. The use of more than one teacher or therapist in either the program or control
           groups.                                                   
         2. Difficulty in assessing goals because of the complexity of the behaviors to be
           evaluated. The measures used to evaluate outcomes are not sensitive enough to
           detect changes that occur as a result of treatment. Bernal and North (1978) sug-
           gest that multiple outcome measures, including objective measures of changes,
           should be used. In addition, the construct validity of self-concept and of locus of
           control has not been established.                         
         3. The use of testers who do not know the purpose of the evaluation and identity
           of treatment and control groups.                          
         4. The usual problems of self-evaluation research, including both the tendency of
           some subjects to answer questions in a socially desirable manner and the amount
           of self-disclosure a subject is willing to give to a self-report inventory.
                                                                     
        In addition, most of the studies reviewed here utilized small sample size and relatively
                                                                     
      brief training periods. Also, the amount of time available for actual behavior change to
      take place is a limitation, because usually several weeks or more need to be spent devel-
      oping student-teacher or therapist involvement and group cohesiveness. How much
      experience one has had in the therapeutic technique used is also a variable.

=== Page 279 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 265
                                                                     
            There is little question that reality therapy has directly or indirectly inspired many
          individuals and schools. Numerous testimonies and endorsements have been made, but
                                                                     
          most applications of the therapy have not been subjected to any kind of formal research
          program.                                                   
            Thelimitedresearchwithclassmeetingandrealitytherapycounselingdoeslendsome
          support to its effectiveness in areas such as discipline and lends little support in other
          areas such as self-concept. Additional research to deal with some of the evaluation prob-
          lems raised in this discussion is necessary for substantiating the validity and usefulness
          of the reality therapy/choice theory concepts and principles.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          CONCLUSION                                                 
                                                                     
          Reality therapy is based on a common sense philosophy that can be used by trained
          persons in many situations. These persons include the teacher in the average classroom,
          those involved in corrections and mental institutions, clinicians, and parents.
            Responsibility is a basic tenet of reality therapy. It is thought that an assuming of
                                                                     
          responsibility will lead to a heightened sense of self-worth or self-respect and a greater
          sense of freedom, both of which may, at the same time, help the person experience better
          relationships and more fun in life.                        
            Reality therapy emphasizes the rational and the cognitive. Clients are asked to
          describe their behavior specifically and to make a value judgment concerning its
          effectiveness. A specific plan to alter a concrete behavior is then drawn up, and a
          commitment to follow that plan is elicited from the client. Praise is given for success; no
                                                                     
          excusesareacceptednorispunishmentgivenforfailure.Althoughthisapproachappears
          almost simplistic, its success is dependent on an honest and thorough commitment on
          the part of the therapist to maintain concern and effort in the face of continued failure.
          As W. Glasser (1965) wrote:                                
                                                                     
            [the] practice [of] reality therapy takes strength; not only the strength of the
            therapist to lead a responsible life himself, but also the added strength both to
            stand up steadily to patients who wish him to accede to their irresponsibility,
            and to continue to point out reality to them no matter how hard they struggle
            against it. (p. 23).                                     
                                                                     
            Testimonials and informal surveys indicate that reality therapy has a positive effect
          on clients and situations, but new and better approaches to definitive research must be
                                                                     
          sought. Future research designs must include explicitly defined control and experimental
          groups and the use of reliable and valid criterion measures.
            Reality therapy requires time to be effective. Future research should be oriented
          toward longitudinal studies of a year or more, and the shorter-term studies must include

=== Page 280 (1 cols) ===
266   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      more sessions and subjects if one hopes to measure impact. Use of a formal behavior
      rating scale, test, or coding instrument to measure the actual behavior change of the
      client from pretreatment to posttreatment is recommended. It may also prove fruitful to
      develop an empirical observation system that could help validate the degree to which
      reality therapy techniques are actually being implemented in the classroom.
        Reality therapy focuses on freedom, not license. With loving firmness and respect,
      the child is led away from irresponsibility toward the responsibility and concomitant
      self-respect that come with true freedom and a successful identity.
      Case Study                                                     
      John,age10,wasreferredbyhisparentsattherequestofthepublicschoolsystembecause
      of his continued refusal to talk. The difficulty manifested itself in kindergarten, and by
      the end of third grade, he had become a legend in the school system with a multitude
      of school personnel eager to take on the challenge of making him talk. The previous
      year he had been diagnosed as having elective mutism and as manifesting anxiety, social
      withdrawal, and depression both at school and at home. He was passive and withdrawn
      when confronted with the usual sibling onslaughts from his two brothers and two sisters,
      and he did not play with the neighbor children. At age 10, he was still an occasional
      bed wetter. His mother characterized him as a good boy who was quiet and reserved, who
      entertained himself well, and who enjoyed playing alone.       
        Initially, John appeared tense, stiff, immature, and sensitive. He lowered his head to
      avoid eye contact, and if the situation became too stressful for him, he began scratching
      his arm and cheek. He was fearfully shy and refused to speak. A beginning relationship
      was formed with him through playing games, going for walks, or getting some candy at
      a nearby store. As he gradually relaxed, he began to smile and laugh a bit during the
      sessions, but when asked a question, he would only shake his head or occasionally write
      his answer on a piece of paper.                                
        As the relationship became stronger, he was told that he and the therapist would
      no longer play for the entire hour. Instead, he was told they would talk or sit together
      for the first 15 minutes. When he came for the next session, this plan was initiated.
      Hewasquestionedabouthishappinessandunhappinessandabouteventsathomeandat
      school. Althoughhe did notnot speak, he noddedyesthat he wasunhappy.The problem
      behaviors that his parents and the school said he was engaging in were stated, and he
      was asked for his opinion. These behaviors included not talking in school, having no
      friends, crying a lot, and receiving poor grades. These were written on a piece of paper,
                                                                     
      and he was asked to check the ones that he agreed with. He checked not talking in
      school and having no friends. With several of his problem behaviors out in the open,
      he was asked if they were making him unhappy and if he wanted to do something about
      them. He nodded. Although some behaviors were identified and a value judgment made

=== Page 281 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 267
                                                                     
          by John, he was not yet ready to do something about them. Attempts to elicit a plan
          from him resulted only in a lowered head and a shrug of his shoulders. At this point,
                                                                     
          more strengthening of the relationship was needed, and the sessions continued with
          the initial 15 minutes reserved for conversation. Initially, the therapist talked and John
          nodded when possible or else they sat in silence. On occasion, the therapist would ask
          a question and then answer it for him in a manner he wouldn’t like. This action made
          John uncomfortable but did not elicit any speech. The sessions began focusing on his
          refusal to speak at school. He indicated that he wanted to talk, that he understood that
          it was important to do so, that he realized his not talking might result in his failing for
                                                                     
          the year, and yet he refused to speak.                     
            As the relationship grew stronger, it became more threatening to John. He had begun
          to initiate some silent mouthing that indicated at least some desire to talk. He was now
          faced with giving up his symptoms. An occasion when the therapist called John’s home
          added to this pressure. Expecting the mother to answer, the therapist was surprised to
          be greeted by a loud male child’s voice. It was John’s. At the next session, John was
                                                                     
          confronted with the phone call. John smiled but did not respond. At this point, the
          therapisttested therelationshipbypointingoutthatJohnhadbeencomingfor2months
          but that he was contributing very little, and perhaps they should consider termination.
          He was told to think about these things and that they would pursue the subject at his
          next session. He agreed to this with a nod of his head.    
            On his next visit, John appeared more uneasy than usual. He started the session by
          indicating that he wanted to play. This proposal was countered by the therapist’s saying
                                                                     
          that last week’s problem had to be discussed. After a brief review of the problem and
          reconfirmation of John’s value judgment, he was asked to talk. Again, he refused. In an
          attempt to force the issue, the therapist suggested that John’s mother be called and told
          that they were terminating. John sat still for several minutes before nodding his head in
          consent. The therapist immediately said he decided against it, changed the subject, and
          took John to play. The rationale behind taking a chance was the risk that the involve-
          ment was great enough to keep John from terminating. Strong as it was, however, the
                                                                     
          involvement was not yet sufficient to help John replace his problem behavior. So with
          this in mind, the therapist backed off and continued to be friendly and interested in
          John. Therapy is based on a relationship, and there are times in every relationship when
          one loses face or gives ground. Frightening as it might have been for the therapist, his
          move demonstrated to John the important lesson that one can be strong without always
          being in control.                                          
                                                                     
            For the next month, John’s presenting problem was avoided and the involvement
          was focused on. His nonverbal interaction increased and he was more relaxed, laugh-
          ing, and appearing content. At the end of this month he was once again asked what he
          was doing and whether it was doing him any good. He seemed quicker to agree to his

=== Page 282 (1 cols) ===
268   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      symptoms and to indicate that he was not pleased with them. While joking with him
      about hearing his voice on the phone, the therapist had the thought that John might
      talk into a tape recorder. John indicated he would not. He was asked if he would take
      the recorder home, talk into it there, and then bring it back the next time. He agreed
      to this, and they shook hands on the plan. He did not, however, follow through. Rather
      than preaching, the therapist indicated to John that he had not carried out the plan
      as agreed, and John was asked if he wanted to try again. He indicated that he did, and
      the following week, he arrived with the tape, gesturing to have it put on the recorder,
      which the therapist did. In a whispered tone came the word “Hello.” John was praised a
      great deal for his feat. Over the next several sessions, John continued to make tapes at
      home and bring them to each following session. John’s responses on tape were eventually
      enlarged into whispered sentences. Each of John’s efforts was reinforced, and the thera-
      pist often asked him if it felt good to have accomplished this. Always John would smile
      and nod yes.                                                   
        But it was time now to move on, and during the next session, it was again indicated to
      John that he would have to start talking aloud, that using the tapes was a good start and
      an indication that it was not so bad to talk. It was emphasized that it was time for John to
      demonstrate his contribution to the relationship and to talk because the therapist had
      been doing most of the work. “Please say ‘Hi’,” the therapist said. There were several
      minutes of silence and finally, with great effort and initial mouthing behavior, John said
      “Hi” in an audible whisper.                                    
        This was a special moment for both of them, and it was followed by much praise.
      On leaving, John whispered, “Good-bye.” This incident impressed again how necessary
      a strong involvement is in therapy and how critical it is in effecting change. How much
      it must have taken John to say those words!                    
        Expectations for the next session were quickly lowered when John sat and said noth-
      ing during the beginning of the hour. Asked if he would talk aloud, he shook his head
      no. Reminding him of the progress from the last session and the triumph of his success,
      the therapist asked John whether he would talk if the therapist turned his back to him.
      He nodded yes and they shook on it. The therapist turned his back and looked out the
      window. About 5 minutes passed before John spoke loudly enough to be heard. The ther-
      apist, continuing to sit with his back to John, then asked him several simple questions
      and received the answers. Then they talked about John’s success during his session, with
      a lot of praise being given. A plan was made to continue this approach for the next cou-
      ple of sessions. A written commitment was made. The plan was carried out, with John
      talking to the therapist in a whisper while the therapist sat with his back to John.
        After two sessions, a plan was made that they would talk face-to-face. When John
      arrived for the next session, he was more uneasy than usual. He sat down and the
      therapist said hello. About 2 minutes of silence followed before John whispered “Hi.”

=== Page 283 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 269
                                                                     
          They talked about what he had watched on television and what he had done on the
          weekend and in school, with John responding in whispers. This continued for several
                                                                     
          sessions, and the therapist then asked him what could be done to help him talk in his
          normal voice. At first John shrugged his shoulders, but then he said, “Talk louder.”
          This became his responsibility for the next session. At the next meeting, John fulfilled
          his commitment; he and the therapist talked for approximately 30 minutes.
            After this meeting, each session lasted for about 45 minutes, and they were able to
          talk for the entire time. Up until this point John’s not talking in school had not been
          discussed. It was important for him to get used to talking in his “loud” (normal) voice
                                                                     
          over a period of time in order to break his old habit of getting by without speaking.
          At a certain point, however, it was hoped that John might be able to generalize his
          success. Consequently, John was asked if the therapist could call his teacher to check
          on his school progress; John agreed. The therapist learned that John was not talking in
          the classroom.                                             
            At the next session, the therapist asked John if this was true and John said it was.
                                                                     
          When the subject was pursued, John said he did not want to continue not talking in
          school. He was asked what his plan would be, and he said he would talk to his teacher.
          The therapist indicated that the plan wasn’t quite clear in terms of how, when, and
          where.Aftersomediscussion,itwasdecidedthathewouldtalktotheteacheronTuesday
          and Friday mornings. When asked what he would say, he indicated that he would say
          hello and ask to go to the bathroom instead of just raising his hand. The plan was written
          up and signed, with each of them receiving a copy.         
                                                                     
            When John came back the following week, he indicated that he had carried out the
          plan. Over the next several sessions, they worked on increasing the number of days and
          the things he would say. Indeed, everything seemed to be progressing even better than
          expected. Each time a plan was formulated; a commitment was made and executed.
          A phone call from John’s mother, however, changed all that.
            John’s mother called, saying that she had just returned from a parent-teacher con-
          ference and was told that John was not talking at school. This news was an eye-opener
                                                                     
          becausepreviouscontactswithherhadbeenencouraging;sheindicatedearlierthatJohn
          was talking more in the neighborhood and in the local stores. John, it turned out, had
          been telling both his mother and the therapist that he was talking in school when, in
          fact, he was not. The therapist had taken John’s word, which on the surface seemed to
          be the thing to do because a good relationship existed. But John had learned to keep
          the therapist off his back by quickly setting up a plan and then indicating that he had
                                                                     
          carried it out.                                            
            The next time John came to therapy and indicated that he had executed his plan,
          he was asked if he had any objection to the therapist’s calling his teacher to ask how he
          was doing. He said yes. When the therapist asked what the objection was, John replied

=== Page 284 (1 cols) ===
270   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      that it was not necessary to call the teacher, that he was reporting everything that was
      happening. The therapist expressed doubt and told John about his mother’s phone call.
      John admitted to not having talked in school and started to make excuses for his lack
      of success. He was immediately interrupted and asked if he wanted to talk in school;
      he said he did. Plans similar to the ones used before were then formulated, with the
      further stipulation that the therapist would call the teacher each week to check on how
      John’s plan was working. The therapist told John he was very much interested in John’s
      talking progress in school and also in knowing how the teacher perceived the progress
      and whether this progress was the same as he, the therapist, thought it was. John agreed
      to this additional plan.                                       
        To coordinate their efforts, the therapist saw the teacher before the next session.
      She was cooperative and interested in helping in any way possible. She was informed
      of John’s progress to date and of some of the techniques that were being used with him.
      She agreed to read some literature on reality therapy and carry out some suggestions.
      The need to praise John’s talking and the consequences to be used if the rules were not
      followed were particularly emphasized.                         
        John was told that what took place at this meeting between the teacher and the ther-
      apist and what could be expected. It became evident that John was much more likely to
      talk if he went up to the teacher’s desk. They started with this approach, and soon he
      was doing this at least once a day. John would walk to the teacher’s desk when he had
      a question, and later, the teacher would also ask him questions. Eventually, plans were
      also made and carried out whereby John talked to his gym and music teachers. Again, he
      was able to communicate with them in a whisper.                
        During this period, John was strongly regarded for his successes, and his feelings of
      self-worth appeared to increase. He would now admit that school was a better place
      than before and that he did enjoy it more. John and his therapist discussed John’s talking
      louder and also talking from his desk, but he was still not willing to make a commitment
      to either of these actions. At this point the school year had ended, and because of a
      number of scheduling problems and summer programs, it was decided that there would
      be no more therapy sessions during the summer. It was agreed that John’s mother would
      contact the therapist in the fall if things were not going well for him.
        In the beginning of October, John’s mother called and indicated that John had
      regressed in school and that he wanted to come for therapy. The mother attributed this
      regression in part to his new teacher, who was older and more authoritarian than the
      previous one. She reported that he had had a good summer, that he talked to others
      outside the home, and that he was less shy and more outgoing.  
        The therapist and John were able to pick up and begin pretty much where they ended
      in the spring. John was still talking in a loud voice to the therapist and, in no time at

=== Page 285 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 271
                                                                     
          all, in a whisper, once again, to the teachers. In a short time, the therapist was able to
          elicit a value judgment and a commitment from John that he wanted to talk out loud
                                                                     
          in school. It was agreed that John would speak with the teacher alone at her desk. It
          was also established that if the plan was not carried out, John would have to miss recess.
          Because he understood and agreed to the outcome before he engaged in the activity,
          missing recess was seen as a logical consequence of his behavior, not as punishment.
          When he did not talk out loud to his teacher at her desk for the first time, he missed
          recess. At the same time, it was stipulated that he would have to come up with a plan so
          that not talking aloud and missing recess would not happen again. His plan was to try it
                                                                     
          once more with a specific sentence to say, which turned out to be, “Can I have my math
          assignment?” This time it worked for him. At this point, he and his teacher agreed to
          his doing this at least three times a week with the days being his choice. The plan was
          accomplished, and within a short time John was saying something out loud at least once
          a day. Because the teacher was working so well with him, John and the therapist agreed
          to meet only twice a month.                                
                                                                     
            There were ups and downs during the school year, but overall John continued to
          improve. Toward the end of school, John was beginning to talk out loud from his desk,
          but this activity was still somewhat troublesome for him. The therapist agreed to con-
          tinue to see him during the summer once a month to help him prepare for a new teacher
          and grade. In the last several sessions he talked “a blue streak.” He was spontaneous,
          showing no shyness, and was much more confident of his own ability to perform. They
                                                                     
          wenttoastoretobuycandyandthereheaskedtheclerkseveralquestionsandresponded
          to a question asked of him. John and the therapist also talked about alternative strategies
          and choices—he agreed to talk out loud from his desk when school began in the fall, and
          he appeared confident about doing so.                      
            During the course of therapy, the therapist repeatedly emphasized that he was inter-
          ested in John’s dealing with the present, particularly in John’s attempts to succeed and
          to deal with his problems in an effective and responsible manner. With John, it was
                                                                     
          necessary that he be assured that the therapist would stick with him until his problem
          was resolved. To this extent, the relationship played a major role. When John resorted
          to “I can’t,” in discussing certain situations, the therapist converted “I can’t,” to “You
          don’t want to or you mean you won’t—let’s explore the choices you have.” Until the
          two were involved and until John realized that he was responsible for his own behavior
          and that something could be done about his problem, little progress occurred. Through
                                                                     
          the involvement, he finally realized that he was responsible for his talking. In this way,
          he was helped to understand his capacity for more worthwhile behavior in his imme-
          diate environment. His decisions to become involved, to change his behavior, and to
          continue talking were the essence of therapy.

=== Page 286 (1 cols) ===
272   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      ANNOTATED   BIBLIOGRAPHY                                       
      Glasser, N. (Ed.). (1980). What are you doing? How people are helped through reality therapy. New
        York, NY: Harper & Row.                                      
          In this book, 25 case histories by therapists who have received certification from the Insti-
        tuteof Reality Therapy are presented. The cases were selected toshow as many different kinds
        of problems as possible. The cases are so varied that anyone using the steps of reality therapy
        should be helped toward a better understanding of how the steps work in practice. Eight of
        the cases deal with children and adolescents.                
      Glasser, N. (Ed.). (1989). Control theory in the practice of reality therapy: Case studies. New York,
        NY: Harper & Row.                                            
          Glasser examines control theory’s role in the practice of reality therapy through case stud-
        ies. These case studies provide interesting examples of ways that control theory can be trans-
        lated into the practice of reality therapy. The cases are detailed enough so professionals can
        learn more about how control theory and reality therapy can be applied together.
      Glasser, W. (1969). Schools without failure. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
          The concepts of reality therapy as applied to the schools are presented here. Many school
        practicesaredescribedthatpromoteasenseoffailureinthestudent,andsuggestionsaregiven
        for correcting these practices. The three types of class meetings are presented with numerous
        topics that could be used for each one.                      
      Glasser, W. (1986). Control theory in the classroom. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
          The author provides a useful analysis of what is wrong with traditional schooling and what
        needs to be done. The book translates control theory into a classroom model of team learning
        in the schools. Numerous ideas are given that will contribute to the success of classroom
        teachers. The book discusses discipline problems and learning team models.
      Glasser, W. (1998). Choice theory: A new psychology of personal freedom. New York, NY: Harper-
        Collins.                                                     
          This book stresses the importance of good relationships in everyday living. It is based on
        internal motivation rather than on external controls. Glasser indicates that if we do not
        improve our relationships, we will have little success in reducing the problems that may be
        encountered with other people in our lives.                  
      Glasser, W. (2000). Reality therapy in action. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
          This book is a continuation of his 1965 book on reality therapy. He demonstrates through
        a series of conversations with his clients, his personal style of counseling. His approach
        shows how he has incorporated the direct teaching of choice theory into the use of reality
        therapy.                                                     
      Gossen, D. (1992). Restitution: Restructuring school discipline. Chapel Hill, NC: New View.
          This book presents in detail how restitution, a key approach to discipline, is used in reality
        therapy. It focuses on how children and adolescents can correct mistakes and stresses positive
        solutions to problems instead of punishment.                 
      Litwack, L. (Ed.). (1994). Journal of Reality Therapy: A compendium of articles 1981–1993. Chapel
        Hill, NC: New View.

=== Page 287 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 273
                                                                     
             These articles, from the first 13 years of the Journal of Reality Therapy, present a thorough
            overview of the development of the concepts and practice of reality therapy.
          Wubbolding, R. (1988). Using reality therapy. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
             The author demonstrates the practical uses of reality therapy and the principles of control
                                                                     
            theory. Case studies and exercises allow readers to apply specific reality therapy principles to
            their own behaviors. In addition, the book covers marriage and family counseling, the use of
            paradoxical techniques, supervision, and self-help.      
          Wubbolding, R. (1991). Understanding reality therapy: A metaphorical approach. New York, NY:
            Harper & Row.                                            
             Professionals will find a detailed presentation of the principles behind control theory and
            the techniques of reality therapy. Metaphors, analogies, and anecdotes are used in a clear,
            concrete, and brief style that enables the professional to develop applications for clients.
            Also included are conversations with patients and questionnaires that help analyze feelings
            and how to take better control of one’s actions.         
          Wubbolding, R. (2000). Reality therapy for the 21st century. Philadelphia, PA: Brunner-Routledge.
             This book is a very comprehensive and practical one that presents the ideas behind reality
            therapy.ThereaderisintroducedtohisWDEPsystemthatincludes22typesofself-evaluation
            therapists can use to shorten therapy time.              
                                                                     
                                                                     
          REFERENCES                                                 
                                                                     
          Allen, J. M. (1990). Reality therapy with at-risk elementary students to enhance self-esteem and
            improve grades and attendance. Dissertation Abstracts International, 51 AAC 9114834.
          Austin,D.M.(2013).Effectofacounselinginterventionprogramontenthgradestudent’satten-
            dance,disciplinereferrals,andacademicachievement.(Doctoraldissertation).Availablefrom
            Proquest Dissertations and Theses Database. (Order No. 3552680)
          Baskin, E., & Hess, R. (1980). Does affective education work?: A review of seven programs,
            Journal of School Psychology, 18, 40–50.                 
          Bassin, A., Bratter, T., & Rachin, R. (Eds.). (1976). The reality therapy reader: A survey of the work
                                                                     
            of William Glasser. New York, NY: Harper & Row.          
          Bean, J. S. (1988). The effect of individualized reality therapy on the recidivism rates and
            locus-of-control orientation of male juvenile offenders. Dissertation Abstract International, 49,
            AAC 8818138.                                             
          Bernal, M., & North, J. (1978). A survey of parent training materials. Journal of Applied Behavior
            Analysis, 11, 533–544.                                   
          Bigelow, G., & Thorne, J. (1979). Reality versus client-centered models in group counseling.
            Group Counselor, 191–194.                                
          Block, M. A. (1995). A study to investigate the use of reality therapy in small group counsel-
            ing sessions to enhance the self-concept levels of elementary students. Dissertation Abstracts
            International, 56 AAC 9520590.                           
          Coats,K.(1991).Theimpactofrealitytherapyinaschoolforemotionallydisturbedyouth.ERIC
            Document Reproduction Service, No. ED 355 690.

=== Page 288 (1 cols) ===
274   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Crawford, D., Bodine, R., & Hoglund, R. (1993). The school for quality learning: Managing the
        school and classroom the Deming way. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
      Dreikurs, R., Grunwald, B., & Pepper, R. (1971). Maintaining sanity in the classroom. New York,
        NY: Harper & Row.                                            
      English, J. (1970, March). The effects of reality therapy on elementary age children. Paper presented
        at the meeting of the California Association of School Psychologists and Psychometrists,
        Los Angeles.                                                 
      Erwin, J. C. (2004). The classroom of choice: Giving students what they need and getting what you
        want. Alexandria VA, Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
      Ford, E. (1974). Why marriage? Niles, IL: Argus.               
       Ford, E. (1987). Love guaranteed: A better marriage in 8 weeks. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
       Ford, E. (1989). Freedom from stress. Scottsdale, AZ: Brandt Press.
       Ford, E. (1994). Discipline for home and school. Scottsdale, AZ: Brandt Press.
       Ford, E., & Englund, S. (1977). For the love of children: A realistic approach to raising your child.
        Garden City, NY: Anchor Press.                               
       Ford, E., & Englund, S. (1979). Permanent love: Practical steps to a lasting relationship: A reality
        therapy approach to caring. Minneapolis, MN: Winston Press.  
       Ford, E., & Zorn, R. (1975). Why be lonely? Niles, IL: Argus. 
      Glasser, N. (Ed.). (1980). What are you doing?: How people are helped through reality therapy.
        New York, NY: Harper & Row.                                  
      Glasser, N. (Ed.). (1989). Control theory in the practice of reality therapy: Case studies. New York,
        NY: Harper & Row.                                            
      Glasser, W. (1964). Reality therapy: A realistic approach to the young offender. Crime and
        Delinquency, 10, 135–144.                                    
      Glasser, W. (1965). Reality therapy. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
      Glasser, W. (1969). Schools without failure. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
      Glasser, W. (1972). The identity society. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
      Glasser, W. (1974). A new look at discipline. Learning: The Magazine for Creative Teaching, 3,
        6–11.                                                        
      Glasser, W. (1976a). A new look at discipline. In A. Bassin, T. Bratter, & R. Rachin (Eds.), The
        reality therapy reader: A survey of the work of William Glasser. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
      Glasser, W. (1976b). Positive addiction. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
      Glasser, W. (1981). Stations of the mind. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
      Glasser, W. (1984). Take effective control of your life. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
      Glasser, W. (1986a). Control theory in the classroom. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
      Glasser, W. (1986b). The control theory/reality therapy workbook. Canoga Park, CA: Institute for
        Reality Therapy.                                             
      Glasser, W. (1990). The quality school: Managing students without coercion. New York, NY: Harper-
        Collins.                                                     
      Glasser, W. (1993). The quality school teacher: A companion volume to the quality school. New York,
        NY: HarperCollins.                                           
      Glasser, W. (1994). The control theory manager. New York, NY: HarperCollins.

=== Page 289 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 275
                                                                     
          Glasser, W. (1996). Staying together: A control theory guide to lasting relationships. New York, NY:
            HarperCollins.                                           
          Glasser, W. (1998). Choice theory: A new psychology of personal freedom. New York, NY: Harper &
            Row.                                                     
                                                                     
          Glasser, W. (2000). Reality therapy in action. New York, NY: Harper Collins.
          Glasser, W. (2011). Take charge of your life: How to get what you need with choice theory psychology.
            Bloomington, IN: Universe.                               
          Glasser, W., & Zunin, L. (1973). Reality therapy. In R. Corsini (Ed.), Current psychotherapies.
            Itasca, IL: Peacock.                                     
          Glasser,W.,&Zunin,L.(1979).Realitytherapy.InR.Corsini(2nded.),Currentpsychotherapies.
            Glasser’s approach to discipline. Itasca, IL: Peacock.   
          Good, P. (1992). Helping kids help themselves. Chapel Hill, NC: New View.
          Gorter-Cass, S. E. (1988). Program evaluation of an alternative school using William Glasser’s
            reality therapy model for disruptive youth. Dissertation Abstracts International, 49, AAC
            8818789.                                                 
          Gossen, D. (1992). Restitution: Restructuring school discipline. Chapel Hill, NC: New View.
          Grant, F. (1972). A study of the effects of open-ended classroom meetings on social and aca-
            demic self-concept and internal responsibility for academic successes and failures. Dissertation
            Abstracts International, 33(10-B), 1506-B.               
                                                                     
          Hale, J. V. (2011). An examination of reading and mathematic achievement among second
            grade students who have received instruction from either teachers who have been trained
            in choice theory/reality therapy methods or teachers who have not been trained. (Doctoral
            dissertation).Available fromProquestDissertationsandThesesDatabase. (OrderNo.3466495).
          Harris,M.A.(1992).Effectofrealitytherapy/controltheoryonpredictorsofresponsiblebehavior
            of junior high school students in an adolescent pregnancy prevention program. Dissertation
            Abstracts International, 54 AAC 9314582.                 
          Hart-Hester, S. (1986). The effects of reality therapy techniques on the behavior of elementary
            school students across setting. Dissertation Abstracts International, 48 DA 8715124.
          Harvey, V., & Retter, K. (2002). Variations by gender on the four basic psychological needs,
            International Journal of Reality Therapy, 21, 33–36.     
          Hawes, R. M. (1971). Reality therapy in the classroom. Dissertation Abstracts International,
            32(5-A), 2483.                                           
          Hough-Waite, L. (1980). A comparison of the art of parenting and parent involvement program.
                                                                     
            Unpublished master’s thesis, Central Michigan University, Mt. Pleasant.
          Hunter, M. L. (1973). Group effect on self-concept and math performance. Dissertation Abstracts
            International, 33(10-B), 5169.                           
          Jackson, D. (2005). Violent girls who bully. Lanham, MD: American Correctional Associate.
          James, R., & Gilliland, B. (2003). Theories and strategies in counseling and psychotherapy (5th ed.).
            Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.                               
          Kunze, K. S. (1992). The effects of group counseling on low-achieving and/or underachiev-
            ing ninth graders participating in an alternative education program. Dissertation Abstracts
            International, 53 AAC 9231483.

=== Page 290 (1 cols) ===
276   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Lewis, V. E. (2002). User assessments of Glasser-based behavioral management in-service pro-
        gram for teachers. Dissertation Abstracts International Section A: Humanities and Social Sciences,
        63(1-A), 98.                                                 
      Litwack, L. (Ed.). (1994). Journal of Reality Therapy: A compendium of articles 1981–1993. Chapel
        Hill, NC: New View.                                          
      Lord,B.D.(2005).Theeffectsofchoicetheory/realitytherapyprinciplesonhighschoolstudents’
        perception of needs satisfaction and behavioral change. Dissertation Abstracts International
        Section A: Humanities and Social Sciences, 66(1-A), 96.      
       Marandola, P., & Imber, S. (1979). Glasser’s classroom meeting: A humanistic approach to
        behavior change with preadolescent inner-city learning disabled children. Journal of Learning
        Disabilities, 12, 30–34.                                     
       Matthews,D.B.(1972).Theeffectsofrealitytherapyonreportedself-concept,socialadjustment,
        reading achievement, and discipline of fourth and fifth graders in two elementary schools.
        Dissertation Abstracts International, 33(9-A), 4842.         
       McGuiness, T. (1977). Idea book for the parent involvement program. Los Angeles, CA: Educator
        Training Center.                                             
       Murphy, L. (1997). Efficacy of reality therapy in the schools: A review of the literature from
        1980–1995. Journal of Reality Therapy, 16, 12–20.            
       Myers, L., & Jackson, D. (2002). Reality therapy and choice theory: Managing behavior today,
        developing skills for tomorrow. American Correctional Association.
       Omizo, M., & Cubberly, W. (1983). The effects of reality therapy classroom meetings on
        self-concept and locus of control among learning disabled children. Exceptional Child, 30,
        201–209.                                                     
       Passaro, P. D., Moon, M., Wiest, J., & Wong, E. (2004). A model for school psychology practice:
        Addressing the needs of students with emotional and behavioral challenges through the use
        of an in-school support room and reality therapy. Adolescence, 39, 1–8.
       Petra, J. R. (2001). The effect of a choice theory and reality therapy parenting program on chil-
        dren’s behavior. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering,
        61(9-B), 5001.                                               
       Poppen,W.,&Welch,R.(1976).Workwithoverweightadolescentgirls.InA.Bassin,T.Bratter,
        &R.Rachin(Eds.),Therealitytherapyreader:AsurveyoftheworkofWilliamGlasser.NewYork,
        NY: Harper & Row.                                            
       Quinn, B. (1979). The efficacy of the open-ended classroom meetings with junior high chil-
        dren on self-concept and attitude toward school. Unpublished manuscript. Central Michigan
        University, Mt. Pleasant.                                    
       Radtke, L., Sapp, M.,&Farrell, W.(1997). Realitytherapy: Ameta-analysis. International Journal
        of Reality Therapy, 17, 4–9.                                 
       Robert, M. (1973). Loneliness in the schools. Niles, IL: Argus.
       Rosario, A. C. (1973). The interaction of counseling strategy and locus of control. Dissertation
        Abstracts International, 33(10-B), 5169.                     
       Shearn, D., & Randolph, D. (1978). Effects of reality therapy methods applied in the classroom.
        Psychology in the Schools, 15, 79–83.

=== Page 291 (1 cols) ===
Reality Therapy Approaches 277
                                                                     
          Tamborella,E.(1987).Theperceptionsofstaffandstudentsinanalternativehighschoolprogram
            using RT behavior management. Dissertation Abstracts International, 48, DA 8727114.
          Tangeman, J. A. (1973). An investigation of the effects of two classroom guidance programs
            on self-concept and achievement of third grade students. Dissertation Abstracts International,
                                                                     
            34(8-A, pt. 1), 4764.                                    
          Wicker, C. W. (2000). The use of reality therapy group counseling with African-American high
            school students who claim to be suffering from premenstrual syndrome. Dissertation Abstracts
            International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering, 60(9-B), 4924.
          Wubbolding, R. (1988). Using reality therapy. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
          Wubbolding, R. (1991). Understanding reality therapy. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
          Wubbolding, R. (1995). Reality therapy in theory. In D. Capuzzi & D.R. Cross (Eds.), Counseling
            & psychotherapy: Theories and intervention (pp. 338-424). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Merrill.
          Wubbolding, R. (2000). Reality therapy for the 21st century. Philadelphia, PA: Brunner-Routledge.
          Wubbolding, R. (2011). Reality therapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
          Yarbrough, J., & Thompson, C. (2002). Using single-participant research to assess counseling
            approaches on children’s off-task behavior. Professional School Counseling, 5, 1096–1107.
          Yarish, P. (1986). Reality therapy and locus of control of juvenile offenders. Journal of Reality
            Therapy, 6, 3–10.                                        
                                                                     
          Zeeman, R., & Martucci, L. (1976). The application of classroom meetings to special education.
            Exception Children, 42, 461–462.

=== Page 292 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 293 (1 cols) ===
CHAPTER                             
                                   8                                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
               Solution-Focused          Approaches                  
                                                                     
                                                                     
                               J                                     
                                OHN                                  
                                   J. M                              
                                     URPHY                           
            You can’t solve a problem with the same type of thinking that created it.
                                                 —Albert Einstein    
                                                                     
                                                                     
          I n a classic article from the business literature, Levitt (1975) describes how various
                                                                     
            industries failed when they became product-oriented rather than consumer-oriented.
          Railroad leaders in the mid-20th century scoffed at the possibility that air travel might
          eventually become a key player in the transportation business. Heads of the major movie
          studiosweresimilarlycaughtoffguardbytelevisionbecausetheywronglysawthemselves
          in the movie versus entertainment industry. When television was first introduced, movie
          mogul Darryl Zanuck claimed that it would not last beyond 6 months because people
                                                                     
          would quickly tire of sitting in their living rooms and staring at a tiny box every night
          (Lee, 2000). This arrogant lack of foresight eventually forced the bankruptcy and closure
          of once-powerful movie studios.                            
            We can fall into a similar trap as psychotherapists and counselors by acting like we
          are in the therapy business rather than the business of helping people change. Regardless
          of theoretical orientation, all therapists need to prioritize the consumer-driven goal of
          helping people change over the model-driven goal of maintaining theoretical purity
                                                                     
          (Wachtel, 2011). With these points in mind, this chapter describes solution-focused
          approaches to counseling and psychotherapy with children and adolescents. The terms
          therapy and therapist are used throughout the chapter for the sake of simplicity.
            The chapter begins with an overview of the history and theory of solution-focused
          practice. The theory section includes a description of its basic assumptions and views on
          psychopathology, followed by general therapeutic goals and interventions. While most
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                   279

=== Page 294 (1 cols) ===
280   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      of the discussion and examples involve individual therapy, other uses of solution-focused
      practice are also covered such as group work and educational applications. The chapter
      concludes with a discussion of research on the effectiveness of solution-focused
      approaches, along with a short client example involving an adolescent client and her
      parents. The acronym “SF” will occasionally be used for “solution-focused.”
      HISTORY  AND STATUS                                            
      Solution-focused approaches originated in the family-based work of Steve de Shazer,
      Insoo Kim Berg, and colleagues at the Brief Family Therapy Center (BFTC) in Milwau-
      kee, Wisconsin. Prior to his work at the BFTC, which was founded in 1978, de Shazer
      became familiar with the work of Milton Erickson while studying with family therapy
      pioneers Jay Haley, Virginia Satir, and John Weakland at the Mental Research Insti-
      tute (MRI) in Palo Alto, California—the place where he met future BFTC co-founder
      and wife Insoo Kim Berg. Berg came to the United States from Korea in 1957. She was a
      giftedclinicianwhocontributedsubstantiallytotheevolutionofsolution-focusedthink-
      ing from its origins in the 1970s through her death in 2007. Berg and de Shazer, who
      died in 2005, were prolific writers and trainers who traveled the world to share the ideas
      and methods of solution-focused practice.                      
        The term solution-focused brief therapy (SFBT) was coined in the 1980s several
      years after the Milwaukee group began meeting to discuss therapeutic issues and ideas.
      Inspired by the innovative work of Milton Erickson (Haley, 1973) and the Mental
      Research Institute (Watzlawick, Weakland, & Fisch, 1974), along with Gregory
      Bateson’s writings on cybernetics and psychiatry (Bateson, 1972), the Milwaukee team
      launched a research and clinical program aimed at addressing the question, “What works
      in brief therapy?” The question itself reveals SFBT’s historical interest in simplicity,
      efficiency, and practicality—an interest reminiscent of the pragmatic philosophies of
      William James and Ludwig Wittgenstein, both of whom espoused the practical benefits
      of identifying and describing “what works” to improve a situation instead of developing
                                                                     
      lengthy and complex explanations and interpretations of the situation.
        Starting in the late 1970s, the Milwaukee team videotaped and analyzed thou-
      sands of therapy sessions in an effort to clarify what makes for effective therapeutic
      conversations—that is, what do therapists and clients talk about when therapy is successful?
      Instead of beginning with a specific theory or hypothesis, the team let the clients
      lead them to new answers and insights. Several standard SFBT interventions began
                                                                     
      as fortuitous interventions with an individual client (e.g., first session task, presession
      change question). If the same intervention worked well for other clients and other
      problems, the team would continue to use it and examine the results. The principles

=== Page 295 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 281
                                                                     
          and practices that proved most effective in helping people change evolved into the core
          assumptions and methods of solution-focused practice.      
                                                                     
            Postmodern thinking and social constructionism (Gergen, 1985) became increasingly
          important in SFBT’s development, with emphasis on the constructionist idea that ther-
          apeutic conversations can alter and reconstruct the way clients view themselves, their
          problems, and their possibilities. This led de Shazer and colleagues to pay even greater
          attention to the words that transpire between clients and therapists and to the therapist’s
          precise use of language and questions (Berg & de Shazer, 1993; de Shazer, 1988, 1994).
          They found that therapeutic dialogue had a powerful effect on outcomes and developed
                                                                     
          solution-focused interventions that encouraged a conversational shift from past-focused
          problem talk about clients’ diagnoses and problem history to future-focused “solution
          talk” about their goals and possibilities.                 
            One of the most intriguing discoveries of the Milwaukee team was that effective
          solutions did not require extensive knowledge about the problem—in fact, solutions
          often bore little resemblance to the problem. This finding challenged the long-held
          assumption that a thorough diagnosis is required for a successful solution. The team
                                                                     
          also discovered the benefits of following the lead of clients by asking for specific descrip-
          tions of what they want from therapy (client-driven goals), how they will know when
          they get it (client-driven criteria of goal attainment), and what they are already doing
          to help themselves reach their goals (successes and strengths). These methods not only
          made sense based on observations of countless therapy sessions, but produced favorable
          results in a shorter period of time—the “brief” aspect of SFBT.
                                                                     
            By the mid-1990s, solution-focused therapy was routinely included in counsel-
          ing and therapy textbooks under the category of postmodern approaches. As the
          approach gained greater international exposure in Europe, Asia, and Latin America
          throughout the 1990s and beyond, two professional associations—the European
          Brief Therapy Association (EBTA) and Solution-Focused Brief Therapy Association
          (SFBTA)—were established to promote research, development, and networking among
          SFBT practitioners and researchers. Although the BFTC in Milwaukee formally closed
                                                                     
          its doors in December of 2007, the ideas of SFBT live on through many therapists
          and writings that have modified the approach in various ways. Among the most
          popular modifications are solution-oriented therapy (O’Hanlon & Weiner-Davis,
          2003) and strengths-based therapy (Saleebey, 2012). Variations of solution-focused
          therapy for children, adolescents, and school problems include brief counseling (Litrell,
          1998; Sklare, 2004), change-oriented therapy (Bertolino, 2003), and student-driven
          interviewing (Murphy, 2013).                               
                                                                     
            The increased visibility of solution-focused ideas throughout the world has been
          accompanied by a progressively wider range of programs, services, settings, problems,

=== Page 296 (1 cols) ===
282   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      and clients—including children and adolescents—to which the approach has been
      successfully applied. These applications include corporate coaching (Berg & Szabó,
      2005), child protective services (Wheeler & Hogg, 2012), classroom management and
      teaching (Berg & Shilts, 2005), school-based intervention (Metcalf, 2010; Murphy,
      2008), divorce (Weiner-Davis, 2001), substance abuse (Hendrick, Isebaert, & Dolan,
      2012), schizophrenia (Panayotov, Strahilov, & Anichkina, 2012), sexual abuse and
      trauma (Dolan, 2000), self-harming adolescents (Selekman, 2009), and domestic
      violence (Lee, Uken, & Sebold, 2012).                          
        The conceptual simplicity and hopeful stance of solution-focused approaches appeals
      not only to therapists and clients, but to paraprofessionals who are increasingly called
      on to implement services in group homes, schools, and other settings that serve children
      and adolescents. Refer to Lipchik, Derks, Lacourt, and Nunnally (2012) for additional
      information on the origins of solution-focused therapy.        
      OVERVIEW  OF THEORY                                            
      This section provides an overview of solution-focused theory, assumptions, and views on
      psychopathology.                                               
      Basic Theory and Assumptions                                   
      Everything we do as therapists is influenced by our attitudes and assumptions about
      people, problems, and solutions. They guide decisions about what questions to ask,
      what to focus on, and how to evaluate the effectiveness of services. The theoretical
                                                                     
      ideas and assumptions of solution-focused practice have evolved from three decades of
      clinical practice, observations, and research on what works in therapy. The following
      assumptions are adapted from several sources (de Shazer et al., 2007; Franklin, Trepper,
      Gingerich, & McCollum, 2012; Murphy, 2008, 2013) and reflect the simple, practical
      emphasis on doing what works to help people change.            
        Collaboration enhances change. The quality of the client–therapist relationship—as
                                                                     
      perceived by the client—is strongly linked to therapeutic outcomes (Norcross, 2010;
      Orlinsky, Rønnestad, & Willutzki, 2004). Given that successful relationships are built
      on mutual respect and collaboration, it is no surprise that client involvement is the cen-
      terpiece of effective therapeutic relationships (Orlinsky et al., 2004). Solution-focused
      therapy is a highly collaborative approach that invites children and adolescents to par-
      ticipate in every aspect of their care from developing goals to evaluating services. People
      are more likely to implement ideas and interventions that emerge from their input and
                                                                     
      resources as compared to uninvited ideas that are imposed on them by therapists or oth-
      ers. “It is always best if change ideas and assignments emanate from the client, at least
      indirectly during the conversation, rather than from the therapist, because the client is
      familiar with these behaviors” (de Shazer et al., 2007, p. 5).

=== Page 297 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 283
                                                                     
            Unlike many therapy approaches, the concept of “resistance” has no place in
          solution-focused work because clients are always seen as cooperating with their own
                                                                     
          theories and perceptions. It is the therapist’s job to structure services in ways that are
          sensible and engaging to the client. The motto of SF therapists is, “if you want people
          to cooperate with you, then you need to cooperate with them.”
            It is more helpful to focus on future solutions than past problems. In contrast to traditional
          approaches that spend considerable time diagnosing and discussing previous problems,
          solution-focused approaches invite clients to envision and specifically describe their
          preferred futures—that is, what they would prefer to be doing differently if therapy is
                                                                     
          successful and the problem is resolved. This assumption is based on the observation that
          clients often become discouraged by the problem and that lengthy conversations about
          its history, presumed causes, and other such matters can add to their discouragement.
            Most clients welcome the opportunity to discuss what they can do to make things bet-
          ter rather than what they have done to make things worse. This does not mean that all
          discussions of the problem or the past should be avoided at all costs; to do so could inval-
          idate the person’s struggle and exclude potentially useful information. The approach
                                                                     
          is solution-focused, not solution-forced; it is neither problem-phobic nor past-phobic.
          There is a big difference, however, between discussing a problem in solution-focused
          ways and conducting intensive explorations and analyses of the problem.
            Another aspect of this assumption that distinguishes solution-focused approaches
          from others pertains to the assumed relationship between problems and solutions.
          Whereas most approaches assume that there is a logical relationship between problems
          and solutions and that changes occur through a problem-leading-to-solution sequence,
                                                                     
          SF theory holds that effective solutions may have little or nothing to do with the
          problem.                                                   
            Language shapes people’s perceptions of themselves, their problems, and their possibilities.
          What we say in therapy and how we say it can powerfully shape people’s perceptions of
          themselvesandtheirpossibilities(Wachtel,2011).Thepowerofdialogueinshapingper-
          ceptions has been confirmed by social psychology research (Fiske & Taylor, 2008), which
                                                                     
          suggests that clients’ conversations with others—whether positive or negative—shape
          self-perceptions in ways that correspond to the discussion. When people are asked to
          reflect on problems and other negative aspects of their lives, they report lower levels
          of self-esteem and contentment than those who reflect on positive aspects (McGuire
          & McGuire, 1996). These findings suggest that the positive or negative wording of a
          question may affect not only its answer, but the way that children and adolescents sub-
          sequently think about the topic and themselves.            
                                                                     
            Solution-focused therapists distinguish between problem talk and solution talk
          (Franklin et al., 2012). Problem talk focuses on problem history, causes, and diagnosis;
          solution talk focuses on the client’s goals, resources, and possibilities. Therapists provide
          the opportunity for clients to discuss their problems without becoming mired in problem

=== Page 298 (1 cols) ===
284   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      talk. This chapter describes various techniques for increasing solution talk and boosting
      students’ involvement, cooperation, and hope.                  
        Every client has strengths and resources that can be used to build solutions. This assumption
      urges therapists to approach clients from a hopeful perspective that honors their unique
      perceptions,resources,andexperiences.Youngpeoplewhostrugglewithseriousproblems
      often overlook small successes, strengths, and resources. They may not even realize that
      they have such resources, much less apply them, unless someone explicitly asks about
      them. For example, most children and adolescents have solved many problems in their
      lives, and their previous solutions may be useful in addressing their current concerns.
        Therapistsarealerttoanysignsofsuccessandcompetencybecausethesearethebuild-
      ing blocks of therapeutic change in solution-focused approaches. More specifically, the
      therapist and client coconstruct alternative patterns of thinking and behavior by draw-
      ing on the client’s existing repertoire of skills and abilities. Without denying the pain
      andfrustrationofseriousproblems,SFtherapistsinvitechildrenandadolescentstoapply
      what is right and working in their lives toward solutions. Viewing clients as resourceful
      opens up solution opportunities that might otherwise remain hidden and unnoticed.
      Since every person brings a unique blend of resources to the table, customized solutions
      are developed “one client at a time” based on the person’s strengths and successes.
        Change is constant and all problems fluctuate. This assumption acknowledges the ongo-
      ing flux of human behavior. Regardless of how constant a problem seems, there are
      always fluctuations in its presence and intensity. Solution-focused therapists are very
      interested in these “exceptions” to the problem, which are defined as the times in which
      the problem is absent or less intense. Building on exceptions is a core intervention of
      solution-focused approaches. The realization that episodes of success and competency
      co-existwithproblemscanboostyoungpeople’shopeinthepossibilityofsolutions—and
      in their ability to bring them about.                          
        Small changes lead to bigger changes. SF approaches are based on the systemic notion
      that one small change can ripple into larger and more significant changes. Borrowing
      from Erickson’s idea that therapy is often a matter of “tipping the first domino,” SF
      therapists encourage small goals and small steps toward goals. Every positive action,
      no matter how small or trivial it may seem, increases the likelihood that other helpful
      actions will follow.                                           
        If it’s not broken, don’t fix it; If it works, do more of it; if it doesn’t work, do some-
      thing different. These statements capture the pragmatic philosophy of solution-focused
      practice. While the first statement seems obvious, some therapies delve into areas in
      which clients are not requesting help. These areas might include deeper meanings or
      insight, former relationships, or personal growth. Solution-focused therapy addresses
      specific problems and goals that clients want help with and nothing more. The second
      statement emphasizes the core theme of SF work, which is to help clients apply their

=== Page 299 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 285
                                                                     
          strengthsandresourcestowardsolutions.Thethirdstatementurgestherapistsandclients
          toholdlightlytotheoriesandtechniquesandbewillingtoletthemgoandtrysomething
                                                                     
          else when they are not helping to bring about a change.    
            As evidenced in these assumptions, solution-focused theory emphasizes the processes
          of change (e.g., collaboration, building on exceptions) over the specific content to be
          changed (e.g., type or severity of problem). The next section elaborates on SF theory by
          discussing solution-focused perspectives on psychopathology.
                                                                     
          View of Psychopathology                                    
                                                                     
          Solution-focused therapists do not adhere to traditional conceptualizations of diagno-
          sis and psychopathology that are based on the medical/disease model—a model that has
          strongly influenced the helping professions for more than a century (Albee, 2000). In SF
          approaches, clients are viewed as stuck versus sick and problems are seen as temporary
          roadblocks versus symptoms of psychopathology. If SF therapists can deliver services
          and be compensated without assigning a diagnosis, they typically will not assign one.
                                                                     
          This choice is based on the observation that diagnostic labels can diminish young peo-
          ple’s view of themselves and their possibilities, which can happen when the distinction
          between the label and person becomes blurred.              
            While the medical model has been a useful framework for assessing and treating
          physical diseases and ailments, it does not provide adequate direction for treating the
          social-emotional and behavioral problems that are typically referred to child and ado-
          lescent therapists. As a vestige of the medical model and biological psychiatry, psy-
                                                                     
          chopathology diagnoses imply that the problem resides within the child or adolescent.
          In addition to lacking empirical support as a predictive or prescriptive tool (Murphy &
          Duncan, 2007), categories of psychopathology de-emphasize the impact of situational
          and environmental factors on the presenting problem. Attaching the problem directly
          to the child or adolescent can shift people’s attention away from more naturalistic,
          common-sense interventions such as getting more sleep or exercise, altering parent-
                                                                     
          ing or teaching practices, eating healthier foods, or modifying the school environment.
          Diagnostic labels may also reduce people’s accountability and persistence when it comes
          to building solutions. I have seen many young people, parents, and teachers become
          discouraged and give up in the face of presumably unchangeable “internal disorders”
          that appear impervious to everyday solutions (e.g., depression, ADHD, bipolar). Even
          when several professionals reach consensus on what to call a child’s problem, the diag-
          nosis itself does not tell the therapist what this particular child is doing or not doing
                                                                     
          that constitutes a problem or, even more importantly, what will help to improve the
          child’s situation.                                         
            Despite growing concerns about the validity and usefulness of psychological diagno-
          sis with children and adolescents, many therapists have to assign diagnostic labels for

=== Page 300 (1 cols) ===
286   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      practical reasons. For example, some children and adolescents have to be diagnosed in
      order to receive insurance reimbursements and needed services in clinics, schools, and
      other settings. When SF therapists assign diagnoses, they usually do so in a transpar-
      ent and collaborative manner, perhaps showing clients a couple of descriptions from
      the DSM-5 and asking which ones seem most appropriate: “Do you see yourself as more
      anxious or depressed? Is there something else that fits your situation better than these
      descriptions?” In addition to being a more intellectually honest way to assign diagnoses
      compared to doing so without client input, this approach conveys respect for the client’s
      opinion and reinforces the collaborative nature of solution-focused therapy.
        In contrast to approaches that view the diagnoses of psychopathology as a prerequisite
      of effective treatment, SF practitioners discuss problems only insofar as such discussions
      validate clients’ struggles and point toward solutions. Intake interviews and assessments,
      like all other client-therapist interactions, impact client perceptions for better or worse
      (Murphy, 2013). When you think about an intake assessment from the perspective of
      clients, it is no surprise that clients may feel more discouraged after the assessment than
      they did before. Solution-focused therapy is based on the commonsense notion that “we
      get what we’re looking for” from clients. When we view clients through the lens of
      psychopathology, we are encouraging them to do the same. If, on the other hand, ther-
      apeutic questions and conversations focus on what is possible and “right” with clients,
      then they are more likely to experience a sense of hope, empowerment, and possibility
      that is correlated with better therapeutic outcomes (Alarcón & Frank, 2012; Gassman &
      Grawe, 2006).                                                  
        Solution-focused therapists do not deny the pain and reality of serious problems. Nor
      do they denythe factthat some peoplemay experiencea sense of relieffrombeingableto
      nameaproblemastheresultofaformaldiagnosis.Thatbeingsaid,mostsolution-focused
      therapists view the language of psychopathology as more of a hindrance than a help
      when it comes to building therapeutic relationships and solutions with children and
      adolescents.                                                   
      THERAPEUTIC  GOALS  AND INTERVENTIONS                          
                                                                     
      Solution-focused practice is guided by the following therapeutic goals and interventions.
                                                                     
      Major Goals                                                    
      The major goals of solution-focused approaches are to: (a) develop collaborative rela-
      tionships with clients; (b) formulate concrete goals based on clients’ best hopes for
                                                                     
      therapy; and (c) build solutions from clients’ strengths and resources. Solution-focused
      therapists pursue these goals through a variety of interventions.
                                             1

=== Page 301 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 287
                                                                     
          Major Interventions                                        
                                                                     
          The interventions in this section come primarily from the SFBT treatment manual
          (Trepper et al., 2012) and from applications of solution-focused practice with children,
          adolescents, and school problems (Murphy, 2008, 2013). As noted in Chapter 1 of this
          volume (Prout & Fedewa, 2014), practitioners need to adjust interventions to fit the
          developmental needs and abilities of each client—which can be particularly challeng-
                                                                     
          ing with young children and people with significant cognitive or language difficulties.
          Although a few such adjustments are provided throughout this section, a more thorough
          discussion of developmental issues and accommodations in solution-focused practice
          with young people can be found elsewhere (Berg & Steiner, 2003; Murphy, 2013). Key
          therapeutic ingredients and interventions of SF practice include adopting a collabora-
          tive stance, exploring previous solutions and theories, asking solution-focused questions,
          complimenting clients, building on exceptions, and providing a feedback message. In
                                                                     
          addition to their usefulness with children and adolescents, these interventions can be
          used with parents, teachers, and other caregivers.         
                                                                     
          Adopt a Collaborative Stance                               
                                                                     
          Instead of viewing clients as inferior or defective, SF therapists treat them as capable
          collaborators who have the wisdom and resources to make important changes. Collabo-
          ration is enhanced when therapists “lead from one step behind” (De Jong & Berg, 2013)
          by trusting that children and adolescents know themselves and their experiences better
          than anyone else, and by allowing them to teach us what they want from therapy (goals
          and feedback) and what they already have and do that can help them reach their goals
                                                                     
          (resources and successes).                                 
            Solution-focused practitioners invite clients to participate in every aspect of their
          care from developing goals to evaluating therapy services. The collaborative aspect of
          SF practice is based on the practical notion that people are more likely to accept and
          implement ideas that emerge from their input and resources as compared to uninvited
          ideas or interventions that are imposed on them by others. As de Shazer et al. (2007)
                                                                     
          state: “It is always best if change ideas and assignments emanate from the client, at least
          indirectly during the conversation, rather than from the therapist, because the client
          is familiar with these behaviors” (p. 5). Whereas other approaches may view clients as
          “resistant” when they do not implement the therapist’s ideas, or do so in ways that differ
          fromthetherapist’sexpectations,SFtherapistsviewthesesituationsasreflecting(a)peo-
          ple’s natural tendency to protect themselves by being cautious and taking things slowly,
          or (b) the therapist’s mistake in suggesting an intervention that does not adequately fit
                                                                     
          the client’s circumstances or preferences.

=== Page 302 (1 cols) ===
288   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        The above strategies increase the likelihood of establishing the type of collaborative
      relationships that enhance outcomes in child and adolescent therapy (Miller, Wampold,
      & Varhely, 2008; Shirk & Karver, 2011). Some studies suggest that the establishment
      of collaborative therapeutic relationships, while important for clients of all ages, are
      most critical when working with people who experience low levels of social support
      (Leibert, Smith, & Agaskar, 2011) and young people who enter therapy as involuntary
      clients with an understandable degree of anger, suspicion, and caution (Bolton-Oetzel
      & Scherer, 2003; Garner, Godley, & Funk, 2008). When asked what they most need
      and appreciate from helping professionals, adolescents emphasize the importance of lis-
      tening to and respecting their ideas and perceptions rather than telling them what to do
      (Dunne, Thompson, & Leitch, 2000; Everall & Paulson, 2006; Freake, Barley, & Kent,
      2007). The fact that most children and adolescents involuntarily enter services at other
      people’s request reinforces the importance of adopting a collaborative stance in working
      with young clients (McLeod, 2011).                             
      Explore Previous Solutions and Theories                        
      People continually solve problems in their lives, a fact that clients may lose sight of
      while struggling with a serious problem. For this reason, SF therapists make a point of
      exploring clients’ previous solutions regardless of the type of problems to which they
      were applied. Possible benefits of asking about previous solutions include (a) boosting
      hope by reminding clients that they have been successful in resolving other problems,
      and (b) providing direction for resolving the current problem by avoiding what hasn’t
      worked and applying what has.                                  
        The following questions are useful in exploring previous solution attempts:
         • How have you handled similar challenges, and how might one or more of those
           ideas help you now?                                       
         • How can your experiences with other problems help you with the current situa-
           tion?                                                     
         • What types of things have you (or others) already tried? How did they work?
         • Of all the things you have tried, what has worked the best? What would it take
                                                                     
           to do more of that?                                       
           For clients who have had prior services, therapists can ask:
         • What did your counselors do that worked well (and not so well) for you?
         • Of all your experiences in counseling, what has helped you the most? How did
           you turn that into something that was useful to you?      
         • Whatwasmosthelpful/leasthelpfulaboutyourpreviousexperienceswithhelping
           professionals?

=== Page 303 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 289
                                                                     
            • When you think about people in your life who are (or have been) helpful to you,
              what is it about them, or what they do, that is most helpful?
                                                                     
            • What advice do you have for adults who work with young people?
                                                                     
            The following strategies help to clarify clients’ theories and perceptions related to the
          problem and potential solutions:                           
                                                                     
            • Everyone has changed something. How does change usually happen in your life?
            • What needs to happen for things to get better?         
                                                                     
            • If your parents/teachers/friends were here, what would they say if I asked them
              what needs to happen to make things better?            
            • Of everything that could be done about this problem, what do you think has the
              best chance of working?                                
            • Tell me about something you’ve thought about doing but haven’t yet done.
                                                                     
          Ask Solution-Focused Questions                             
                                                                     
            Asking the right question may be the most powerful part of thinking.
                                                 —Edward De Bono     
                                                                     
            Questions are a primary form of communication and intervention in SF therapy
          (Trepper et al., 2012), which is why they are given extensive attention in this chapter.
          In discussing the powerful effect of problem-focused and solution-focused questions on
                                                                     
          clients, Egan (2010) notes:                                
            Like the rest of us, clients become what they talk about and then go on rein-
            forcing what they have become by talking about it. If you always encourage
                                                                     
            them to talk about problems, they run the risk of becoming problem people....
            So be careful about the questions you ask. They should not keep clients mired
            in problem talk because problem talk can keep clients immersed in frustration,
            impotence, and even despair. (p. 292)                    
                                                                     
            The remainder of this section describes the most commonly used questions in SF
          therapy.                                                   
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Open Questions                                             
          Open questions encourage fuller descriptions of clients’ ideas and perceptions as com-
          pared to closed questions. Instead of asking a lot of closed questions such as, “Do you
          care about your grades in school?,” SF therapists prefer to ask open-ended questions like,

=== Page 304 (1 cols) ===
290   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      “What are your views on the importance of grades in school?” Other examples of open
      questions include:                                             
         • How will you know that counseling is working?             
         • What can I do to help you?                                
         • What advice would you give other students who are struggling with this problem?
      Relationship Questions                                         
      Relationship questions such as, “What would your parents say if I asked what they appre-
      ciated most about you?” and “How would you respond to this situation if you were the
      teacher?” are used in solution-focused therapy to explore (a) the role and perceptions of
      key people in the child’s life, and (b) the social consequences of solutions. The following
      questions address both of these categories:                    
         • Whoarethepeopleyourespectthemost?Whatwouldtheydoaboutthisproblem
           if they were in your shoes?                               
         • How will your friends/parents/teachers treat you differently when things start get-
           ting better? What will that be like for you?              
         • Of everyone who is involved with this situation, who is most/least concerned
           about it?                                                 
                                                                     
      Pre- and Between-Session Change Questions                      
                                                                     
      Based on the fact that many clients report positive changes in the presenting prob-
      lem prior to attending their first therapy session (Lawson, 1994; Ness & Murphy, 2001;
      Weiner-Davis, de Shazer, & Gingerich, 1987), solution-focused therapists routinely ask
      the following “presession change” questions early in the first session:
                                                                     
         • Sometimes people notice that things change after they decide to get some help.
                                                                     
           What have you noticed?                                    
         • Has anything changed for the better since you knew that we were going to be
           meeting?                                                  
         • What has changed in this situation, if only just a little, after your parents told you
           that we would be meeting?                                 
                                                                     
        Therapists can ask similar “between-session change” questions and strategies in sub-
                                                                     
      sequent sessions:                                              
                                                                     
         • What’s better since we last met?                          
         • When have things been just a little better during the past week?

=== Page 305 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 291
                                                                     
            • Tell me about something good that has happened between you and your parents/
              teachers/friends since our last meeting.               
                                                                     
                                                                     
            When clients report positive changes, therapists follow up by exploring (a) the details
          and conditions under which these changes occurred and (b) what the client or others
          could do to sustain or increase these changes in the future.
                                                                     
          Miracle Questions                                          
                                                                     
          Helping clients create practical goals is a central feature of SF therapy. The miracle
          question was developed by de Shazer (1988) to help clients formulate goals by inviting
          them to describe life without the problem: “Suppose you were to go home tonight, and
          while you were asleep, a miracle happened and this problem was solved. How will you
          know the miracle happened? What will be different?” (p. 5). Variations of the question
          include the following:                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
            • Suppose a miracle happened tonight and the depression disappears. How would
              you be able to tell? What would be different? What would your friends/parents/
              teachers notice that was different?                    
            • If this problem vanished overnight, how would the morning be different for you?
              How would the afternoon and evening be different?      
            • Imagine that this school problem completely vanished right here and now. What
              would you be doing differently, or more of, for the rest of the school day?
                                                                     
                                                                     
            Visual images and metaphors can be included in the miracle question to engage young
          children’s attention and help them picture life without the problem:
                                                                     
            • If someone waved a magic wand and made this problem disappear, how would
              you be able to tell things were different at school and home?
            • Imagine that we are looking right into a crystal ball at a time in the future when
                                                                     
              this problem between you and your parents is totally gone. What do you see?
              What are you and your parents doing differently?       
            • Pretend there are two movies about your life. Movie #1 is about your life with the
              problem, and Movie #2 is about your life without the problem. I already know a
              lot about Movie #1. Tell me what Movie #2 would look like. Who would be in
              it? What would they be doing?                          
                                                                     
                                                                     
            As illustrated below with Lily, a 12-year-old child referred by her parents for behavior
          problems at home and school, it is helpful to obtain as much detail as possible about the
          client’s vision of the miracle.

=== Page 306 (1 cols) ===
292   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Therapist (T): Suppose a miracle happened while you were sleeping and this problem
                vanished. What would be different at school?         
      Lily:     I wouldn’t get in trouble or have detention after school.
      T:        What else?                                           
      Lily:     My grades would be better.                           
      T:        What else would be different at school or home?      
      Lily:     My parents wouldn’t be talking about school all the time.
        Solution-focused therapists encourage small, concrete, action-oriented goals that are
      stated as the presence of a solution rather than the absence of a problem. They also
      encourage young clients to focus on self-manageable goals that are under their control
      and do not require changes in other people’s behavior. In following up on Lily’s response
      to the miracle question, the therapist asks several questions to promote these particular
      features of solution-focused goals.                            
      Therapist (T): You mentioned that you wouldn’t get in trouble or have detention.
                What could you do differently to stay out of trouble and detention?
                [This question invites Lily to describe the presence of a solution rather than
                the absence of a problem.]                           
      Lily:     Pay attention to my teachers and do my work. And get better grades.
      T:        What would I see if I videotaped you paying attention to your teacher?
                [This question encourages a concrete, action-oriented description of the
                goal.]                                               
      Lily:     I’d be looking at the teacher and taking some notes instead of looking
                at my friends or out the window.                     
      T:        Which one of these things would you be willing to work on first, even
                just a little, during the next couple of days? [This question keeps Lily in
                the driver’s seat by asking for her opinion on what to work on first. The
                phrase “even just a little” invites her to focus on small changes instead of
                large changes that may be overwhelming to her.]      
      Lily:     I guess “taking notes” because it would help my grades.
      T:        That makes sense. What is one small thing you can do next week to
                get a little better on taking notes? [This question encourages Lily to
                commit to a small, specific goal.]                   
                Later in the conversation                            
                               …                                     
      T:        You said that you want your parents to stop asking so many questions
                about school. I wonder what you could do to get them to ask fewer
                questions about school. [This statement paves the way for self-manageable
                goals by inviting Lily to consider what she could do to reduce her parents’
                questions about school.]

=== Page 307 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 293
                                                                     
            The miracle question works well with many children and adolescents because they
          enjoy thinking in playful and metaphorical ways. Another reason it works is because
                                                                     
          people of all ages appreciate the opportunity to focus on future hopes and possibilities.
          However, nothing works all the time with every person. When people do not respond
          to the miracle question or indicate a preference for something different, therapists can
          honor their wishes and move on to other goal development strategies—such as the one
          described next.                                            
                                                                     
          Scaling Questions                                          
                                                                     
          Scaling questions serve several purposes in solution-focused practice, one of which is
          to help clients formulate goals early in the therapeutic process. As illustrated in the
          following examples, scaling questions can be framed in various ways to connect with
          young people and invite them to describe small, specific goals:
                                                                     
            • On a scale from 0 to 10, with 10 being the best that things can be and 0 being
                                                                     
              the worst, where would you rate your overall life right now? What would the next
              higher number look like?                               
            • If a score of 10 is where you want things to be when we finish counseling and 1
              is where things are now, what will be different when it moves up to 2? How will
              you and others be able to tell that you moved up?      
            • Show a young child five wooden blocks and say, “I want to know how things are
              going in school right now.” While arranging five blocks in a row or tower on the
                                                                     
              table, say, “This [pointing to the stack or row of five blocks] means things are
              really great, just the way you want them to be at school, and this [pointing to
              one block] means things are really bad at school. Use those blocks to show me
              how things are going for you at school right now. [After the child responds] Okay,
              what can you do at school this week to give yourself another block?” Therapists
              can use pencils, paper clips, or other available objects for the same purpose.
                                                                     
                                                                     
            In addition to helping clients develop goals, scaling questions provide a snapshot of
          progress and outcomes from the client’s perspective. Many SF therapists begin each ses-
          sion by asking, “On a scale of 1 to 10, with 1 being ‘the worst it can be’ and 10 ‘the
          best it can be,’ how would you rate your situation during the past week?” Relationship
          questions can be framed in a similar scaling format to get a sense of other people’s percep-
          tions: “Where would your teachers/parents rate the situation?” It is important to invite
                                                                     
          clients to elaborate on their ratings through follow-up comments and questions:
                                                                     
            • What is different about this week that you rated a “4” and last week that you rated
              a “6”?

=== Page 308 (1 cols) ===
294   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
         • Wow, that’s four points higher than last week! What did you do to make that
           happen?                                                   
        Scaling strategies can also be used to obtain client feedback on the overall useful-
      ness of services or of a particular therapy session: “On a scale from 0 to 10, how useful
      was today’s meeting?” Given the growing body of empirical research supporting the use
      of formal client feedback measures in therapy (Duncan, 2014; Lambert & Shimokawa,
      2011), some authors have described how brief client feedback surveys can be integrated
      into the solution-focused therapy process (Gillaspy & Murphy, 2012; Murphy, 2013).
      Exception-Related Questions                                    
      The search for “exceptions”—times in which the problem is absent or less noticeable—is
      a foundational technique of solution-focused therapy. Exceptions can be viewed as solu-
      tions that are already happening, though not as intensely or often as desired. The strain
      of a serious problem makes it hard for people to notice small but important fluctuations
      in the problem’s intensity or frequency. De Shazer (1991) observed that “times when
      the complaint is absent are dismissed as trivial by the client or even remain completely
      unseen, hidden from the client’s view” (p. 58). These potential building blocks of change
      may go unnoticed unless therapists ask for them through the following types of questions
      for children, adolescents, and caregivers:                     
         • When is the problem absent or less noticeable?            
         • Which class at school do you get in the least amount of trouble?
         • When have things been just a little better during the past week?
         • When do you and your daughter get along best?             
         • [As follow up to a scaling question] Tell me about a time during the past month
                                                                     
           when things were a little higher than a 3.                
         • [As follow up to the miracle question] What part of the miracle is already hap-
           pening, if only just a little?                            
                                                                     
        Exception-finding questions can be folded into conversations about the presenting
      problem and therapeutic goals. When discussing when and where the problem typically
      occurs, we can ask about the times and places in which the problem is least notice-
      able. As illustrated in the questions listed above, miracle and scaling questions also
      provide opportunities to discover exceptions. When clients say, “I’d smile more and feel
      more relaxed” when asked to describe the next highest number on their scale, thera-
                                                                     
      pists can ask about a recent day or situation in which they smiled more often or felt
      more relaxed. After clients describe life without the problem in response to the miracle
      question, therapists can discover exceptions by asking, “What small pieces of the miracle
      are already happening, even just a little?”

=== Page 309 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 295
                                                                     
            Once an exception is discovered, therapists can clarify related details and circum-
          stances. For example, an adolescent who misbehaves in every class except history can
                                                                     
          be asked:                                                  
            • Whatisdifferentaboutyourhistoryclass/teacherfromyourotherclasses/teachers?
                                                                     
            • How do you manage to behave so well in history class?  
            • What is different about your approach to history class compared to your other
              classes?                                               
                                                                     
            Similar questions can be used with teachers and parents to clarify exception-related
          details and circumstances:                                 
                                                                     
            • What was different about last Tuesday when Jeremy behaved better in your class?
              What did you do or say differently?                    
            • Does Jeremy behave better on certain days of the week or during certain activities
              in your class?                                         
            • What is different about the times when you and your daughter get along better?
                                                                     
            Exception-related questions reveal what clients are already doing to make their lives
          better, which provides the foundation for exception-building interventions that encour-
                                                                     
          age them to do more of what is working. Strategies for building on exceptions are dis-
          cussed later in the chapter.                               
                                                                     
          Coping Questions                                           
          While being careful not to minimize the pain and distress of a serious problem, SF
                                                                     
          therapists assume that all clients are doing something—often several things—to help
          themselves cope with the problem and keep it from getting worse. The following coping
          questions are used (a) to follow up on times when clients report that the problem has not
          changed, and (b) to discover and build on the client’s overall coping skills and resources.
                                                                     
            • When you think of other tough times in your life, what has helped you get
              through? How might one or more of those things help you with the current
              problem?                                               
            • How have you kept things from getting worse?           
                                                                     
            • This is a very tough problem. How have you managed to cope with it so far?
            • Where do you find the strength to keep trying?         
            • How did you resist the urge to react the way you usually do when someone calls
              you a bad name?                                        
                                                                     
            Coping questions remind clients that even in the face of serious struggles and failures,
          they are doing something to help themselves and to keep things from getting worse.

=== Page 310 (1 cols) ===
296   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Compliment Clients                                             
      Complimenting is an essential part of SF therapy that invites young people to adopt a
      more hopeful view of themselves and their situation. Some children have received very
      few compliments in their lives, which makes it hard for them to muster up the hope
      and energy required to tackle difficult problems and persist in their efforts to resolve
      them. Many clients enter therapy fatigued and demoralized as a result of wrestling with
      a problem for weeks or even months. Anything we can do to boost the client’s hope
      will improve outcomes (Alarcón & Frank, 2012), which is why SF therapists frequently
      compliment clients on their positive attributes and actions. Here are a few examples:
         • Everyone has tough times, but not everyone has the strength to do what you’re
           doing by coming here and meeting with me to try to make things better.
         • I’ll bet it was really hard to learn skateboarding. How did you do that?
         • [Following the client’s report of a successful idea or action] Where did you find
           the courage to do that?                                   
         • Since you’ve become somewhat of an expert at turning things around at school,
           would you be willing to help others by sharing your ideas and wisdom?
         • With all you’ve been through, what has prevented you from giving up altogether?
        In a study of the relationship between outcomes and different aspects of solution-
      focused therapy, the practitioner’s use of compliments correlated strongly with positive
      client outcomes (Linssen & Kerzbeck, 2002). Compliments serve to validate what young
      people are already doing well and to acknowledge their struggle.
        In discussing the benefits of positive approaches with children and youth, Wolin,
      Desetta, and Hefner (2000) encourage therapists to “look for strengths in even the most
      troubled young people and encourage them to search for examples of their own compe-
      tence” (p. 4). In my own practice, I have found that certain compliments are applicable
      to most young clients and their caregivers. For example, people can be complimented
      for: (a) attending the therapy session (“It takes courage to meet like this”); (b) cooperat-
      ing with the therapist and the therapy process (“I know I’m asking you a lot of questions
                                                                     
      and I really appreciate your patience in answering them”); and (c) trying to improve
      their lives or those of their children/students (“It takes a lot of caring and courage to
      keep trying instead of giving up when things don’t work the way you want them to”).
                                                                     
      Build on Exceptions                                            
                                                                     
      Building on exceptions to the problem is a core intervention in solution-focused
      practice. As discussed earlier, questions such as “When is the problem less noticeable
      at school?” and “What is different about those times?” help to identify and clarify
      exceptions. Once therapists discover and explore exceptions, they encourage clients

=== Page 311 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 297
                                                                     
          to replicate the exceptions in other situations. This is referred to as “gently nudging”
          clients to do more of what is already working, sometimes in the form of an experiment
                                                                     
          (de Shazer et al., 2007). A short example of building on exceptions is provided below.
            In working with Julian, an adolescent referred for disruptive behavior at school, the
          therapist discovered that Julian received notably fewer discipline referrals from his sci-
          ence teacher compared to his other teachers. When asked what was different about
          science class and his approach to it, Julian said “the teacher is pretty cool” and the
          class is “more interesting” than his other classes. The therapist asked for more details
          and discovered that Julian took more notes in science class, sat toward the front of the
                                                                     
          classroom, did more homework, and arrived to class on time. The therapist and Julian
          discussed an “experiment” in which he might (a) implement one or more of the excep-
          tion behaviors in one of his other classes during the coming week, and (b) observe any
          differences that result from his experiment.               
                                                                     
          Provide a Feedback Message                                 
                                                                     
          Many solution-focused therapists take a 5- to 10-minute break toward the end of each
          session in order to collect their thoughts and construct a feedback message for clients.
          The message typically consists of three components—a compliment, a bridge, and a
          suggestion (De Jong & Berg, 2013).                         
            The end-of-session compliment is intended to validate what is important to clients
          and affirm their strengths and successes. Here is an example from a session involving
          Marisa, a 17-year-old adolescent referred by her parents for ongoing defiance and run-
                                                                     
          ning away from home: “Marisa, it is clear to me that you are a courageous person who
          doesn’tgiveupwhenthingsgettough.Meetingwithmetodayisanotherexampleofyour
          courage and willingness to hang in there and keep trying to improve things between you
          and your parents.” Many clients are relieved and surprised to receive such compliments
          because they may be expecting to hear bad news about themselves or their situation.
          In addition to boosting hope, compliments remind children and adolescents that they
          possess important solution-building assets.                
                                                                     
            The bridge connects a send-off suggestion by providing a rationale for the suggestion.
          The rationale is based on the client’s goals, perceptions, and strengths. For example:
          “I agree with you, Marisa, that it will be very difficult for you to continue living at
          home unless things change between you and your parents. That’s why I want to offer
          a suggestion for you to consider.”                         
            Having provided compliments and a bridge, SF therapists offer an observational
                                                                     
          and/or behavioral suggestion based on the clients’ goals, exceptions, preferences, and
          motivations. Observational suggestions invite people to carefully observe specific
          aspects of their lives that may be helpful in constructing solutions: “Pay attention to
          the times when you get along a little better with your parents, and make note of what’s

=== Page 312 (1 cols) ===
298   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      different about your approach to them or their approach to you. You could even make a
      list of these differences and bring it to our next meeting.” Behavioral suggestions invite
      clients to take action, often in the form of an experiment. “If you’re willing to try an
      experiment, I wonder what would happen if you thanked one or both of your parents
      for one thing every other day this week, and carefully observe any differences in your
      relationship with them.”                                       
        As illustrated with Marisa, the feedback message provides the opportunity to end
      therapy sessions on a positive note by inviting clients to acknowledge and apply their
      resources in solution-building ways. Up to this point, the chapter has focused on the
      application of solution-focused ideas and techniques to individual therapy with children
      and adolescents. The next section describes how these ideas and methods can be applied
      to other contexts and services involving children and adolescents.
      GROUP  WORK  WITH CHILDREN  AND ADOLESCENTS                    
      The ideas and methods of solution-focused approaches lend themselves very well to
      group applications (Corey, 2012; Metcalf, 1998; Sharry, 2007) and have been success-
      fully applied to a variety of child and adolescent groups including the following: Ado-
      lescents who experience serious problems with substance abuse (Froeschle, Smith, &
      Ricard, 2007), test anxiety (Murphy, 2008), and school behavior (Conoley et al., 2003;
      Corcoran, 2012; Franklin, Moore, & Hopson, 2008; Murphy, 1994); adolescents with
      developmental disabilities (Murphy & Davis, 2005); children who struggle with obesity
      (Rudolf et al., 2006); and Hispanic children of incarcerated parents (Springer, Lynch,
      & Rubin, 2000), to name just a few.                            
        The collaborative, client-driven aspect of solution-focused practice is helpful in
      encouraging groups of young people to take more responsibility for developing solutions
      based on their successes, strengths, and wisdom. Group leaders can orient members
      toward strengths and resources by asking about aspects of their lives that are working
      well and exploring how they can apply these assets to their goals. Formal or informal
                                                                     
      scaling strategies can be used at the beginning and end of each meeting to assess
      members’ perceptions of progress and to obtain their feedback on the usefulness of the
      meeting. As with individual therapy, a strong alliance between the group leaders and
      members will improve the outcomes of any group.                
        Most young people are selected to participate in a group as a result of specific prob-
      lems, and it is helpful to hear about and validate their struggles and frustrations with the
                                                                     
      problem. In transitioning from problem-based to solution-based discussions, the group
      leader might say something like this: “I appreciate you telling me about the struggles that
      brought you here because it helps me understand where you’ve been and what you’ve
      gone through. It’s also important for me to know about the times when your problems

=== Page 313 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 299
                                                                     
          don’t happen or when they’re less noticeable, even if it’s just for a few minutes. If we
          can figure out how those times are different from the problem times, then it might give
                                                                     
          us some ideas about how to make things better. Does that make sense?” The remainder
          of this section describes solution-focused elements of a group that I led for adolescents
          who experienced significant test anxiety (Murphy, 2008).   
                                                                     
          Example: Adolescent Test Anxiety Group                     
          The group consisted of five female adolescents, ages 15 through 17, who signed up for
                                                                     
          an after-school group addressing test anxiety. They participated in 6 weekly, 1-hour
          meetings. Solution-focused strategies were used in conjunction with educational and
          skill-building activities such as study strategies, test-taking tips, and relaxation exercises.
          During the first meeting, students completed a few basic information forms and shared
          what they wanted from the group and how they would know if the group was successful
          for them. Most of their goals centered around better study habits, improved test perfor-
          mance, and less worry and anxiety before and during important tests.
                                                                     
            The following questions were asked at the start of the second meeting to explore
          exceptions related to the group’s goals.                   
                                                                     
            • Tell me about a test within the last month or so that you did a little better on.
              Whatwasthesubjectareaofthetest?Whatwasdifferentaboutthistestcompared
              to other tests? What was different about the way you prepared for it? What did
              you do differently right before the test? What did you do differently during the
                                                                     
              test?                                                  
            • Think of a recent test that you studied for more effectively than usual. How did
              you study for this test? How was that different from the way you usually study?
            • Think about a recent test that you worried a little less about. How did you manage
              to do that? What does that tell you about yourself?    
                                                                     
            These questions yielded numerous exceptions, the details of which were explored dur-
                                                                     
          ing the remainder of the meeting. The group appreciated the opportunity to discuss what
          they were already doing that was “right.” One person commented, “I thought I was doing
          everything wrong.” I also asked what they thought about doing but had not yet tried. At
          the end of the second session, members were given the following variation of the for-
          mula first session task in SF therapy: “Between now and next week’s meeting, observe
          and make a list of all the things that you are doing to prepare for and take tests that you
                                                                     
          want to continue doing.”                                   
            As is often the case when people are asked to consult on their own problems, the
          strategies reported by the group members were very similar to established interventions
          in the test anxiety literature with one important difference: Every idea was indigenous

=== Page 314 (1 cols) ===
300   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      to this particular group in this particular place at this particular time, uniquely worded
      and styled in the language of its members. In subsequent meetings, educational materi-
      als on test-taking, relaxation, and study skills were integrated with member-generated
      language and ideas to enhance the relevance and acceptability of group discussions and
      interventionstrategies.Thelastthreemeetingsopenedwithaquestionthatiscommonly
      used at the beginning of solution-focused groups: “What’s better since our last meeting?”
      Memberslikedthisquestionandthemeetingsgotofftoapositive,solution-focusedstart.
        Changes in group members’ test performance and academic grades indicated that
      the group was successful. Four of the five adolescents increased their overall grade
      point average in school, and all five reported improvements in test-taking skills on a
      self-report survey.                                            
      SCHOOL  AND PARENT  APPLICATIONS                               
      This section describes several ways in which solution-focused principles and practices
      can be applied in several educational and parental contexts.   
      Classroom Management and Teaching                              
                                                                     
      Several authors have described how solution-focused ideas can be incorporated into
      classroom management and teaching (Berg & Shilts, 2005; Metcalf, 1999; Murphy,
      2008). Various components of solution-focused practice are consistent with research on
      effective teaching. For example, several researchers (Baker, Grant, & Morlock, 2008;
      Pianta & Stuhlman, 2004) have reported links between children’s academic and social
      success and teachers who do the following:                     
                                                                     
         • Respect the integrity and individuality of students.      
                                                                     
         • Demonstrate confidence in their ability to act responsibly and productively.
         • Encourage them to examine and resolve their own problems. 
         • Involve them in classroom decisions.                      
         • Facilitate positive teacher-student relationships.        
                                                                     
        Just as solution-focused therapy emphasizes the importance of client-therapist rela-
      tionships, a solution-focused approach to classroom management and teaching rests
      largely on strong student-teacher relationships that encourage students’ active involve-
      ment in learning and decision-making (Baker et al., 2008). Effective teachers manage
                                                                     
      the process and structure of the classroom while encouraging student involvement by
      (a) providing opportunities for them to experience success and to share their opinions,
      and (b) connecting instructional topics and activities to the life experiences and inter-
      ests of students (Doll, Zucker, & Brehm, 2004). For example, in presenting a geography

=== Page 315 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 301
                                                                     
          lesson, the teacher might encourage students to read or write about a place they have
          visited or have a special interest in.                     
                                                                     
            A solution-focused approach to teaching can also help prevent and resolve classroom
          behavior problems (Kelly, Liscio, Bluestone-Miller, & Shilts, 2012). Effective teach-
          ers recognize and build on their students’ strengths, resources, and successes instead of
          attendingonlytotheirmistakesandproblems(Goldstein&Brooks,2007).Forexample,
          the teacher could ask a child who displays behavior problems to present a class report
          or write a paper on a personal hobby or strength. This strategy might help to improve
          the teacher–student relationship as well as highlighting the student’s unique talents and
                                                                     
          resources. The teacher could also request the child’s opinion of what might help turn
          things around for the better at school. As illustrated in this chapter, helping profession-
          als have nothing to lose and much to gain by enlisting clients as consultants on their
          own problems and goals.                                    
            Whetherinthe role of therapyclientsorstudents, youngpeoplegreatlyappreciatethe
          opportunity to have a voice in their own care and education. Even when they have no
          specific ideas for improving things, inviting their input conveys respect and can enhance
                                                                     
          student-teacher relationships.                             
            BergandShilts(2005)developedtheWOWW(WorkingonWhatWorks)program,a
          solution-focused approach to teaching and classroom management for implementation
          in K-12 classrooms. This program seeks to improve teacher–student relationships by
          empowering teachers to recognize and apply their strengths as well as their students’
          strengths in setting goals and working in a collaborative manner. The WOWW program
                                                                     
          derives from solution-focused attitudes and assumptions about teachers, students, and
          parents that include:                                      
                                                                     
            • Teachers want to have positive relationships with all children and provide them
              with learning environments and opportunities that will help them be successful
              in school and elsewhere.                               
            • Students want to please their teachers and parents, learn new things, have input
                                                                     
              in their learning, belong to a group, and be accepted by other children and adults.
            • Parents want to have a positive influence on their children and want their chil-
              dren to learn and succeed in school and in life.       
                                                                     
            The WOWW program incorporates many techniques of solution-focused therapy
          approaches including compliments, exceptions, goal-setting, scaling, and coping
                                                                     
          questions. Teachers make ongoing efforts to involve students in learning and classroom
          decision-making by requesting their input in regularly scheduled class-wide meetings as
          well as individual meetings with students. The program also includes a coaching element
          in which mental health professionals who are highly familiar with solution-focused

=== Page 316 (1 cols) ===
302   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      ideas provide consultation and technical assistance to teachers who implement the
      program in their classrooms. In keeping with the cooperative nature of solution-focused
      practice, developers of the WOWW program recommend using it only with teachers
      who voluntarily participate. Preliminary studies suggest that the WOWW program can
      be useful in: (a) increasing teachers’ perceptions of their students as better behaved;
      (b) increasing teachers’ perceptions of their effectiveness as classroom managers; and
      (c) reducing absenteeism, tardiness, detentions, and suspensions.
      Parenting                                                      
      Many of the solution-focused techniques that have been effectively applied by classroom
      teachers have been recommended for use by parents (Harris & Franklin, 2012; Metcalf,
      1997; Selekman, 1993). Instead of describing all of these techniques as they apply to
      parenting, I briefly describe two solution-focused parenting programs.
        Selekman (1993) describes a solution-focused group for parents of adolescents involv-
      ing 6 modules addressing the following areas and strategies: (a) paying attention to what
      is going well at home with their sons and daughters and in their relationship with them;
      (b) setting specific parenting goals and taking small steps toward their goals; (c) observ-
      ing what works best and doing more of it; (d) observing what does not work and doing
      something different; and (e) celebrating any signs of progress and sharing success stories
      with the group.                                                
        In their work with adolescent parents in a group program called Taking Charge (TC),
      Harris and Franklin (2012) emphasize the importance of helping parents set specific,
      action-oriented goals and build on their own strengths and resources in their efforts to
      help their children. Given the challenges of parenting—especially young parents who
      can become easily discouraged—the TC program involves a healthy dose of compli-
      ments throughout the intervention process. Empirical studies of the TC program have
      indicated that it increases the likelihood of adolescent participants staying in school and
      using effective coping skills and behaviors.                   
      Teacher and Parent Consultation                                
                                                                     
      As key caregivers in the lives of young people, parents and teachers are often involved in
      the treatment of child and adolescent difficulties. Many aspects of solution-focused prac-
      ticecanbeeffectivelyappliedtoteacherandparentconsultationregardlessofone’stheo-
      reticalorientation.Practitionerscanvalidateteachers’orparents’struggles,exploretheir
      ideas, acknowledge their resilience, involve them in important ways, and request their
                                                                     
      feedbackthroughoutthedurationofservices.Teachers,parents,andotheradultsrespond
      well to respect, validation, collaboration, and other key elements of solution-focused
      practice as described in this chapter.

=== Page 317 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 303
                                                                     
            Many practitioners who work with children and adolescents find it easier to apply
          solution-focused ideas with children and adolescents compared to their caregivers. For
                                                                     
          example,insteadofvalidatingandgoingwiththeflowasateacherorparentdescribesthe
          situation, the practitioner may have difficulty being patient and resisting the urge to tell
          the teacher or parent what to do. Whatever the reason, it is equally important to work
          with young clients and their caregivers in solution-focused ways in order to maximize the
          benefits of services. More specifically, outcomes are enhanced when providers (a) work
          on goals that are important to parents and teachers, (b) collaborate with them in devel-
          oping interventions instead of trying to coerce them into implementing interventions,
                                                                     
          and(c)provideongoingopportunitiesforthemtostayinvolvedandprovidefeedbackon
          the usefulness of services. In summary, much of what works in solution-focused therapy
          with children and adolescents works in consulting with their teachers and parents.
                                                                     
          Parent-School Conferences and Relationships                
          School problems are common among children and adolescents who receive psychother-
                                                                     
          apy services. As a result, their parents are often involved in meetings with teachers,
          administrators, counselors, and school psychologists. Parent-school relationships have
          received considerable attention in recent years, due in part to a growing body of research
          linking students’ school success to parent involvement (Christenson & Carlson, 2005).
          Parent conferences have been an integral part of school life for many years, and for good
          reason. As the primary caregivers in the student’s life, parents and guardians often hold
          a wealth of information and influence that is very useful in addressing school problems.
                                                                     
          School personnel can enhance the quality of parent-school conferences by approaching
          parents in solution-focused ways.                          
            Parents of children with school problems typically are contacted by the school only
          when their child is in trouble. This may lead parents to avoid schools as much as pos-
          sible because most or all of their interactions with school personnel are negative. The
          solution-focused practice of recognizing small successes urges school personnel to occa-
          sionally contact parents when their child has a better day or week at school. Imagine
                                                                     
          your reaction, as the parent of a struggling student, if you were called by a teacher or
          school counselor to inform you that your child had a good day at school. You might
          even be asked for your theory on how the improvements occurred and what you did to
          help bring them about.                                     
            Approaching parent conferences in solution-focused ways encourages school person-
          nel to interact with parents in respectful ways (Carlson, Hickman, & Burrows-Horton,
                                                                     
          1992). In meeting with parents, school personnel can begin the conference on a
          collaborative note by acknowledging the unique expertise and experience that parents
          bring to the table: “You know your child better than anyone else, and we really need

=== Page 318 (1 cols) ===
304   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      your help here.” Opening parent-school conferences in this manner lets parents know
      that their ideas and experiences are respected and valued by school personnel. The
      solution-focused approach can be extended even further by asking parents about
      exceptions (“Pay attention to the times that Chelsea minds you better at home” or
      “Tell us about some things that you want to continue happening with Chelsea at home
      and school”) and other child and parent resources (“What have you found works best
      in helping Chelsea behave productively at home?” or “Who has the most influence
      with Chelsea?”). These are just a few examples of how solution-focused ideas can
      be used to improve the quality of parent-school conferences and relationships. See
      Carlson et al. (1992) for additional ideas on approaching parent-school conferences in
      solution-focused ways.                                         
      EFFECTIVENESS RESEARCH                                         
      Research has played important roles in the origins and development of solution-focused
      therapies. Guided by the practical question, “What works in therapy?,” the original
      members of the BFTC in Milwaukee “utilized a research approach that relied on clinical
      observations and client data to discover which therapeutic techniques would most
      effectively facilitate behavioral change” (Lipchik et al., 2012, p. 3). Unlike formal
      outcome research and efficacy studies that involve hypothesis-testing, tight controls,
      randomized designs, and quantitative analyses, early research at the BFTC was more
      exploratory, qualitative, and practice-based—an approach that was well-matched to
      the beginning stages of model building and the discovery of new therapeutic techniques
      at the BFTC (Lipchik et al., 2012). Instead of starting out with directional hypotheses
      about what worked or did not work in therapy, the original Milwaukee group diligently
      observed and documented therapeutic ideas and methods that led to positive changes
      for clients.                                                   
        Although no controlled efficacy studies were conducted at the BFTC, the effective-
      ness of solution-focused therapy and some of its specific methods was investigated using
                                                                     
      client surveys and self-reports. In one study, de Shazer et al. (1986) reported a 72% suc-
      cess rate for solution-focused therapy based on a survey in which clients were asked to
      indicate whether or not they had met their goals for therapy. In a similar study, 82% of
      clients surveyed at 6 to 18 months follow-up indicated that therapy was successful for
      them (de Shazer, 1985). In examining the effectiveness of the formula first session task,
      in which clients are asked to observe the things in their lives that they want to con-
      tinue happening, 50 out of 56 new clients (89%) reported that something desirable had
                                                                     
      happened. Forty-six (82%) of them reported that at one or more of the events that they
      wantedtohavehappenintheirliveswas“newordifferent”(deShazer,1985,p.155).Ina

=== Page 319 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 305
                                                                     
          study of the presession change intervention described earlier, 20 of the 30 new clients
          (66%) who were surveyed reported that they noticed desirable changes in the presenting
                                                                     
          problem prior to their first therapy session (Weiner-Davis et al., 1987).
            The number and type of published studies on solution-focused therapy have grown
          steadily over the past two decades. Most studies have examined solution-focused
          brief therapy (SFBT), which is clearly the most popular and well-researched form of
          solution-focused practice. The depth and scope of SFBT studies have improved and
          expanded over time to include randomized designs, treatment integrity checks, and a
          variety of outcome measures in addition to client self-report. Gingerich, Kim, Stams,
                                                                     
          and MacDonald (2012) recently reported a total of 48 published studies and two
          meta-analytic reviews. The effectiveness of SFBT research has been put to the empirical
          test with an increasingly broad range of client populations, contexts, and challenges
          including families, couples, children, adolescents, child abuse, foster care, and school
          problems (Franklin et al., 2012).                          
            When taken as a whole, research studies have shown that SFBT works about as well as
          other approaches but does so in fewer sessions and, therefore, at lower costs (Gingerich,
                                                                     
          Kim, Stams, & MacDonald, 2012). In meta-analyses conducted over the past decade,
          SFBT showed modest effect sizes and outcomes that were generally equivalent to other
          approaches (Gingerich et al., 2012). Empirical studies of SFBT generally have addressed
          overall client outcomes, but some have examined the impact of specific processes and
          techniques of SFBT. McKeel (2012) has reviewed and summarized the results of many
          such studies, which include:                               
                                                                     
                                                                     
            • SFBT techniques have been shown to enhance the hopes and expectations of
              child and adult clients in regard to reaching therapeutic goals and improving
              their lives (Corcoran & Ivery, 2004).                  
            • In a study where 52 clients were randomly assigned to SFBT or problem-focused
              therapy, SFBT clients reported relatively higher expectations that they would
              reach their therapeutic goals than clients who received problem-focused therapy
                                                                     
              (Bozeman, 1999).                                       
            • McKeel (2012) reported that the miracle question, formula first session task, and
              scaling questions were correlates of effective change and that SFBT generally
              instills hope and optimism in clients.                 
            • Simon and Nelson (2004) obtained the following results after asking 91 SFBT
              clients what they found to be most helpful about their therapist: 56 clients (58%)
              said the therapist’s approach (e.g., assigning homework, asking questions, and
                                                                     
              other techniques) was the most helpful factor, and 12 clients (14%) reported that
              the therapist’s encouragement and feedback was the most helpful aspect.

=== Page 320 (1 cols) ===
306   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
         • Clients who have received SFBT report benefits and appreciation of SFBT’s posi-
           tive focus on client strengths and successes (Mireas & Inch, 2009) and validation
           (Lee, 1997).                                              
         • In a study of SFBT with families who have a child with severe intellectual disabil-
           ities, the parents—who rarely hear any good news from helping professionals—
           expressed appreciation for, and empowerment from, the therapist’s acknowledge-
           ment of their skills and successes with their children (Lloyd & Dallos, 2008).
        The majority of research on solution-focused therapy has involved adult clients. Of
      the studies that have specifically targeted child and adolescent clients, most have been
      conducted in schools. In addition to providing ongoing access to children and teens, the
      school setting is an excellent context for solution-focused approaches for the following
      reasons: (a) solution-focused therapy has been effectively used with various involuntary
      andmandatedclientpopulations(Clark,1998;DeJong&Berg,2013;Leeetal.,2012),a
      description that fits many students who enter school-based intervention services against
      their will at the behest of caregivers such as teachers or parents; (b) most schools lack
      the time and money required for long-term therapeutic interventions; (c) the collabo-
      rative nature of SFBT fits well with the school culture of teaming and collaboration as
      evidenced in Response to Intervention (RTI) programs and Individual Education Plan
      (IEP) teams; and (d) the positive, strength-based emphasis of solution-focused practice
      is well-suited to the recent emergence of school-wide positive behavior support (PBS)
      programs (Storey & Post, 2012). These reasons may explain the growing number of pub-
      lications that advocate and describe the implementation and success of solution-focused
      interventions with children, adolescents, and school problems (Bertolino, 2003; Kelly,
      Kim, & Franklin, 2008; Murphy, 2008, 2013; Selekman, 2009).    
        As is the case with many therapeutic approaches for children and adolescents, the
      implementation of solution-focused interventions in schools far exceeds the amount of
      empirical research that has been conducted in school settings. So far, SFBT has been
      empirically shown to improve a wide range of school problems experienced by chil-
      dren and adolescents including poor academic performance (Franklin, Streeter, Kim,
      & Tripodi, 2007; Newsome, 2004), erratic school attendance (Franklin et al., 2007),
      classroom disruption, and various other behavioral problems (Franklin, Biever, Moore,
      Clemons, & Scamardo, 2001; Franklin, Moore, & Hopson, 2008; Froeschle et al., 2007;
      Murphy, 1994). In a comprehensive review of empirical studies of SFBT, Kim (2008)
      reported that the outcomes studies conducted in schools have generally yielded medium
                                                                     
      effect sizes.                                                  
        Continued research on the application of solution-focused therapy with children
      and adolescents is sorely needed. While research findings suggest that solution-focused
      approaches show solid promise with young clients, the increased quality and quantity of

=== Page 321 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 307
                                                                     
          future research on solution-focused therapy will sharpen and expand the evidence base
          on this promising, practical approach to counseling and psychotherapy with children
                                                                     
          and adolescents.                                           
                                                                     
          CONCLUSION                                                 
                                                                     
          A quick story, adapted from Shah (1983), captures the difference between solution-
          focused and traditional, problem-focused approaches. Maurice was walking along the
          neighborhood one evening when he saw his friend Tom crawling around on his hands
                                                                     
          and knees looking for something under the streetlamp. When Tom explained that he
          had lost his keys, Maurice joined him in the hunt. After a few minutes of searching with
          no success, Maurice asked Tom where he was when he dropped the keys. “Over there,”
          Tom said while pointing to a parking lot across the street. Puzzled by his friend’s response,
          Maurice asked the obvious question: “If you dropped your keys all the way over there,
          then why are you looking for them here?” “Because the light is so much better here,”
                                                                     
          Tom replied as he resumed his search.                      
            Many traditional approaches to child and adolescent therapy follow Tom’s lead by
          searching for solutions under the familiar light of diagnosis and symptom reduction
          despiteagrowingbodyofresearchsuggestingthattherapeuticsolutionsaremorelikelyto
          emerge from client strengths, resources, and collaboration. These are the very elements
          that comprise solution-focused therapy with young people and their caregivers.
                                                                     
          Case Study                                                 
                                                                     
          This illustration involves an adolescent (Maria, age 13) and her parents (Rosa and
          Manny). During the first meeting with Maria and her parents, Rosa explained that she
          andMannydecidedtoseekprofessionalassistancebecauseMaria’s“emotionaloutbursts”
          were becoming more frequent and intense. They felt like they were fighting “constant-
          ly” and were very concerned about Maria’s increasingly unpredictable and explosive
          responses to “anything that doesn’t go her way.” Manny was particularly worried about
                                                                     
          the long-term consequences of Maria’s inability to control her emotions, fearing that
          these tirades would hurt her chances in life and that she would be doomed if she kept
          responding so strongly to life’s inevitable ups and downs. Both parents were very con-
          cerned about their eroding relationship with their only child.
            The therapist helped Maria and her parents formulate goals by asking, “How will you
          know if our meetings are working two months from now?,” and the scaling questions,
                                                                     
          “On a scale of 1 to 10, where 1 is the worst it can be and 10 is where you want it to
          be, where would you rate your relationship with your daughter/parents?” and “What will
          be happening differently when this number goes up one point?” Although the parents
          and Maria described their goals in different ways, everyone agreed that “speaking to one

=== Page 322 (1 cols) ===
308   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      another in calm voices” and “finishing their conversations” would represent positive
      steps toward a better future. The therapist delivered the following feedback messages
      separately to Maria and her parents at the end of the first session:
         • Maria, I appreciate your courage in coming here and talking with me today
           because it is not an easy thing to do (compliment). I also appreciate you being
           honest and telling me that you were not sure what would improve things at
           home, which is why I wanted to toss out an idea for your consideration (bridge).
           I want you to make a list of everything about you and your parents that you want
           to continue happening, and we can discuss the list at your next meeting. How
           does that sound?                                          
         • Rosa and Manny, I can see that you love your daughter deeply and want the
           best for her. The very fact that you took this step speaks volumes about your
           commitment to Maria, and she is lucky to have you in her corner (compliment).
           I know the last few weeks have been especially difficult and frustrating, which is
           why I want to leave you with a couple suggestions (bridge). First, make a list of
           everything about Maria and your relationship with her that you want to continue
           happening.Also,payattentiontothetimeswhenyougetalongalittlebetterwith
           Maria, and make a quick note of anything that is different about those situations.
           How does that sound?                                      
        All of these suggestions invited the family to search for exceptions to the seemingly
      “constant fighting” and Maria’s “uncontrollable emotional outbursts.” Maria and her
      parents made a quick note of these suggestions and agreed to carry them out over the
      next week. Rosa commented that she liked the suggestions because things had become
      so negative that they were all walking on eggshells at home. When Manny asked if they
      should tell Maria what they were observing, the therapist left it up to them to decide.
      When asked when they wanted to meet next, they decided that 2 weeks would give them
      ample time to carry out the suggestions.                       
        When they returned a couple weeks later, Rosa, Manny, and Maria each reported
      higher numbers on the scaling questions. They said that they had recently sat down
      after dinner to review their observations with each other. Despite the seeming constancy
      of the problems, everyone shared a list of nonproblem events (exceptions) and positive
      attributes abouteachother. Maria wasobservedonnumerousoccasionsbeingmore com-
      municative, more cooperative, and better able to keep her emotions in check. Maria also
      noted several positive attributes about her parents, not the least of which was that they
                                                                     
      genuinely cared about her and wanted her to be happy. As is often the case in response
      to exception-finding observation tasks, everyone was pleasantly surprised that their list

=== Page 323 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 309
                                                                     
          was as long as it was because it felt like they were fighting constantly and nothing was
          going right in their relationship.                         
                                                                     
            The therapist explored the details of the exceptions reported by Maria and her parents
          by asking what each of them had done to bring about the exceptions and make things
          better at home. For example, when discussing Maria’s emotional outbursts and what
          each person did to improve the situation, Manny commented that his “backing off” and
          “appreciating Maria’s strengths” seemed to improve things around the house and in his
          relationship with Maria. Maria observed that she got what she wanted a lot more when
          she had a friendly attitude and made attempts to talk with her parents about everyday
                                                                     
          stuff rather than only confronting them when she was mad. Rosa observed that when a
          disagreement occurred, all three of them were getting better at taking it in stride rather
          than blowing it up to a huge problem. In short, everyone seemed to be trying just a little
          bit harder to get along. The second session concluded with compliments and the joint
          suggestion to continue observing the good times and making note of what everyone is
          doing to contribute to them.                               
            The third and final session occurred 2 weeks later. Maria and her parents reported
                                                                     
          that things kept getting “much better and calmer” at home. As in the previous session,
          the therapist asked for specific details about the changes and about each person’s con-
          tributions. In addition to helping the therapist learn what each person was doing to
          make things better at home, inviting them to articulate their specific contributions was
          intended to help them sustain and increase their successful efforts and behaviors.
            In order to further amplify and empower the recent changes, the therapist asked
                                                                     
          them to describe their home life before and after things improved. Rosa and Maria
          reported “more harmony” and “a calmer atmosphere.” Manny became emotional when
          he described his “before and after” experiences with Maria, stating that he never realized
          how deeply important his relationship with his daughter was until they started having
          these problems. He also did not realize how many things he admired and respected about
          Maria, which included the fact that she was not swept away by the urge to wear the right
          clothes, have the right friends, or do other such things in order to be popular at all costs
                                                                     
          “like so many other girls her age.” Manny continued as Maria and Rosa looked on with
          tears in their eyes. “I’m proud that Maria is more interested in what is happening in the
          world and what people could do to make it better.” Finally, he said that he and Maria
          scheduled a political night to discuss politics and world events, which strengthened their
          relationship in ways that neither could have predicted.    
            When asked where they wanted to go from there, the family elected to discontinue
          therapy. The therapist thanked Maria, Rosa, and Manny for their cooperation, compli-
                                                                     
          mented them on their hard work and commitment, and wished them well.

=== Page 324 (1 cols) ===
310   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      NOTE                                                           
      1. Solution-focused therapists generally prefer the word idea to intervention because it
         fits better with the collaborative notion of working “with” clients rather than doing
         something “to” them. However, the term interventions is used in this chapter for the
         sake of consistency.                                        
      ANNOTATED   BIBLIOGRAPHY                                       
      Franklin, C., Trepper, T. S., Gingerich, W. J., & McCollum, E. E. (Eds.). (2012). Solution-focused
        brief therapy: Research, practice, and training. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
          Written primarily for practitioners and scholars, this volume includes contributions by an
        international set of experts on SFBT theory, practice, and research. Chapters cover a wide
        rangeofproblems,settings,andclientsincludingdomesticviolenceoffenders,runawayyouth,
        K-12students,childprotectionclients,adultswithsubstanceabuseproblems,andpeoplewith
        schizophrenia.                                               
      Murphy, J. J. (2008). Solution-focused counseling in schools (2nd ed.). Alexandria, VA: American
        Counseling Association.                                      
          This volume, named Book of the Year by the American School Counselor Associa-
        tion, translates the ideas of solution-focused therapy into practical, research-supported tech-
        niques designed for school-based counseling with students, parents, and teachers. Counseling
        strategies are illustrated through dozens of examples and dialogue from real-world counsel-
        ing sessions involving preschool through secondary students and their caregivers. The book’s
        appendices offer practical forms and materials for everyday use in providing counseling and
        other school-based mental health services.                   
      Murphy, J. J. (2013). Conducting student-driven interviews: Practical strategies for increasing student
        involvement and addressing behavior problems. New York, NY: Routledge.
          This book (a) provides solution-focused strategies for increasing students’ involvement in
        every aspect of their care from goal development through evaluation of services and (b) offers
        step-by-step guidelines and illustrations for approaching every conversation as an opportunity
        for change. It also includes a companion website with interview protocols, sample referral
        forms, and tips for teachers and parents.                    
                                                                     
                                                                     
      REFERENCES                                                     
                                                                     
      Alarcón, R. D., & Frank, J. B. (2012). The psychotherapy of hope: The legacy of persuasion and
        healing. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.      
      Albee, G. W. (2000). The Boulder model’s fatal flaw. American Psychologist, 55, 247–248.
      Baker, J. A., Grant, S., & Morlock, L. (2008). The teacher-student relationship as a develop-
        mental context for children with internalizing or externalizing behavior problems. School
        Psychology Quarterly, 23, 3–15.

=== Page 325 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 311
                                                                     
          Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an ecology of the mind: A revolutionary approach to man’s understanding
            of himself. New York, NY: Chandler.                      
          Berg, I. K., & de Shazer, S. (1993). Making numbers talk: Language in therapy. In S. Friedman
            (Ed.), The new language of change (pp. 5–24). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
                                                                     
          Berg, I. K., & Shilts, L. (2005). Classroom solutions: WOWW coaching. Milwaukee, WI: BFTC
            Press.                                                   
          Berg, I. K., & Steiner, T. (2003). Children’s solution work. New York, NY: Norton.
          Berg, I. K., & Szabó, P. (2005). Brief coaching for lasting solutions. New York, NY: Norton.
          Bertolino, B. (2003). Change-oriented therapy with adolescents and young adults. New York, NY:
            Norton.                                                  
          Bolton-Oetzel, K. B., & Scherer, D. G. (2003). Therapeutic engagement with adolescents in
            psychotherapy. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 40, 215–225.
          Bozeman, B. N. (1999). The efficacy of solution-focused therapy techniques on perceptions of hope
            in clients with depressive symptoms. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, New Orleans Baptist
            Theological Seminary.                                    
          Carlson, C. I., Hickman, J., & Burrows-Horton, C. (1992). From blame to solutions:
            Solution-oriented family-school consultation. In S. L. Christenson & J. C. Conoley (Eds.),
            Home-school collaboration: Enhancing children’s academic and social competence (pp. 193–214).
            Washington, DC: National Association of School Psychologists.
                                                                     
          Christenson, S. L., & Carlson, C. (2005). Evidence-based parent and family interventions
            in school psychology: State of scientifically based practice. School Psychology Quarterly, 20,
            525–528.                                                 
          Clark, M. D. (1998). Strength-based practice: The ABC’s of working with adolescents who don’t
            want to work with you. Federal Probation, 62, 46–53.     
          Conoley, C. W., Graham, J. M., Neu, T., Craig, M. C., O’Pry, A., Cardin, S. A.,
                                                       …             
                                                        Parker, R. I.
            (2003). Solution-focused family therapy with three aggressive and oppositional-acting chil-
            dren: An N                                               
                  =                                                  
                    1 empirical study. Family Process, 42, 361–374.  
          Corcoran,J.(2012).Reviewofoutcomeswithchildrenandadolescentswithexternalizingbehav-
            ior problems. In C. Franklin, T. S. Trepper, W. J. Gingerich, & E. E. McCollum (Eds.),
            Solution-focused brief therapy: A handbook of evidence based practice (pp. 121–129). New York,
            NY: Oxford University Press.                             
          Corcoran, J., & Ivery, J. (2004). Parent and child attributions for child behavior: Distinguishing
            factors for engagement and outcome. Families in Society: The Journal of Contemporary Social
            Services, 85, 101–106.                                   
          Corey, G. (2012). Theory and practice of group counseling (8th ed.). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.
          De Jong, P., & Berg, I. K. (2013). Interviewing for solutions (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.
          de Shazer, S. (1985). Keys to solution in brief therapy. New York, NY: Norton.
          de Shazer, S. (1988). Clues: Investigating solutions in brief therapy. New York, NY: Norton.
          de Shazer, S. (1991). Putting difference to work. New York, NY: Norton.
          de Shazer, S. (1994). Words were originally magic. New York, NY: Norton.
          de Shazer, S., Berg, I., Lipchik, E., Nunnally, E., Molnar, A., Gingerich, W., & Weiner-Davis, M.
            (1986). Brief therapy: Focused solution development. Family Process, 25, 207–222.

=== Page 326 (1 cols) ===
312   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      de Shazer, S., Dolan, Y., Korman, H., Trepper, T., McCollum, E., & Berg, I. K. (2007). More than
        miracles: The state of the art of solution-focused brief therapy. New York, NY: Haworth Press.
      Dolan, Y. M. (2000). One small step: Moving beyond trauma and therapy to a life of joy. New York,
        NY: Authors Choice Press.                                    
      Doll, B., Zucker, S., & Brehm, K. (2004). Resilient classrooms: Creating healthy environments for
        learning. New York, NY: Guilford Press.                      
      Duncan, B. L. (2014). On becoming a better therapist (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psy-
        chological Association.                                      
      Dunne, A., Thompson, W., & Leitch, R. (2000). Adolescent males’ experience of the counseling
        process. Journal of Adolescence, 23, 79–93.                  
      Egan, G. (2010). The skilled helper: A problem-management and opportunity-development approach
        to helping (9th ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.        
      Everall,R.D.,&Paulson,B.L.(2006).Thetherapeuticalliance:Adolescentperspectives.Coun-
        seling and Psychotherapy Research: Linking Research with Practice, 2, 78–87.
      Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. (2008). Social cognition: From brains to culture. New York, NY:
        McGraw-Hill.                                                 
      Franklin, C., Biever, J., Moore, K., Clemons, D., & Scamardo, M. (2001). Effectiveness of
        solution-focused therapy with children in a school setting. Research on Social Work Practice,
        11, 411–434.                                                 
      Franklin, C., Moore, K., & Hopson, L. (2008). Effectiveness of solution-focused brief therapy in
        a school setting. Children and Schools, 30, 15–26.           
      Franklin, C., Streeter, C. L., Kim, J. S., & Tripodi, S. J. (2007). The effectiveness of a
        solution-focused, public alternative school for dropout prevention and retrieval. Children and
        Schools, 29, 133–144.                                        
      Franklin, C., Trepper, T. S., Gingerich, W. J., & McCollum, E. E. (Eds.). (2012). Solution-focused
        brief therapy: Research, practice, and training. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
      Freake, H., Barley, V., & Kent, G. (2007). Adolescent’s views of helping professionals: A review
        of the literature. Journal of Adolescence, 30, 639–653.      
      Froeschle, J., Smith, R., & Ricard, R. (2007). The efficacy of a systematic drug prevention pro-
        gram for adolescent girls. Professional School Counseling, 10, 498–505.
      Garner,B.R.,Godley,S.H.,&Funk,R.R.(2008).Predictorsofearlytherapeuticallianceamong
        adolescents in substance abuse treatment. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs, 40, 55–65.
      Gassman, D., & Grawe, K. (2006). General change mechanisms: The relation between prob-
        lemactivationandresourceactivationinsuccessfulandunsuccessfultherapeuticinteractions.
        Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 13, 1–11.             
      Gergen,K.(1985).ThesocialconstructionistmovementinAmericanpsychology. AmericanPsy-
        chologist, 40, 266–275.                                      
      Gillaspy, A., & Murphy, J. J. (2012). Incorporating outcome and session rating scales
        in solution-focused brief therapy. In C. Franklin, T. S. Trepper, W. J. Gingerich, &
        E. E. McCollum (Eds.), Solution-focused brief therapy: A handbook of evidence based practice
        (pp. 73–94). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

=== Page 327 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 313
                                                                     
          Gingerich,W.J.,Kim,J.S.,Stams,G.J.J.M.,&MacDonald,A.J.(2012).Solution-focusedbrief
            therapy outcome research. In C. Franklin, T. S. Trepper, W. J. Gingerich, & E. E. McCollum
            (Eds.), Solution-focused brief therapy: A handbook of evidence based practice (pp. 95–111).
            New York, NY: Oxford University Press.                   
                                                                     
          Goldstein, S., & Brooks, R. B. (2007). Understanding and managing children’s classroom behavior:
            Creating sustainable, resilient classrooms. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
          Haley, J. (1973). Uncommon therapy: The psychiatric techniques of Milton H. Erickson, M.D.
            New York, NY: Norton.                                    
          Harris, M. B., & Franklin, C. (2012). Taking charge: A solution-focused intervention for
            pregnant and parenting adolescents. In C. Franklin, T. S. Trepper, W. J. Gingerich, &
            E. E. McCollum (Eds.), Solution-focused brief therapy: A handbook of evidence based practice
            (pp. 247–263). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.    
          Hendrick, S., Isebaert, L., & Dolan, Y. (2012). Solution-focused brief therapy in alcohol treat-
            ment.InC.Franklin,T.S.Trepper,W.J.Gingerich,&E.E.McCollum(Eds.),Solution-focused
            brief therapy: A handbook of evidence based practice (pp. 264–278). New York, NY: Oxford Uni-
            versity Press.                                           
          Kelly, M. S., Kim, J. S., & Franklin, C. (2008). Solution-focused brief therapy in schools. New York,
            NY: Oxford University Press.                             
          Kelly, M. S., Liscio, M., Bluestone-Miller, R., & Shilts, L. (2012). Making classrooms more
                                                                     
            solution-focused for teachers and students: The WOWW teacher coaching program. In
            C. Franklin, T. S. Trepper, W. J. Gingerich, & E. E. McCollum (Eds.), Solution-focused brief
            therapy:Ahandbookofevidencebasedpractice(pp.354–370).NewYork,NY:OxfordUniversity
            Press.                                                   
          Kim,J.S.(2008).Examiningtheeffectivenessofsolution-focusedbrieftherapy: Ameta-analysis.
            Research on Social Work Practice, 18, 107–116.           
          Lambert, M. J., & Shimokawa, K. (2011). Collecting client feedback. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.),
            Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-based responsiveness (2nd ed., pp. 203–223).
            New York, NY: Oxford University Press.                   
          Lawson, D. (1994). Identifying pretreatment change. Journal of Counseling & Development, 72,
            244–248.                                                 
          Lee, L. (2000). Bad predictions. Rochester, MI: Elsewhere Press.
          Lee, M. Y. (1997). A study of solution-focused brief family therapy: Outcomes and issues. Amer-
            ican Journal of Family Therapy, 25, 3–17.                
                                                                     
          Lee,M.Y.,Uken,A.,&Sebold,J.(2012).Solution-focusedpracticewithcourt-mandateddomes-
            ticviolenceoffenders.InC.Franklin,T.S.Trepper,W.J.Gingerich,&E.E.McCollum(Eds.),
            Solution-focused brief therapy: A handbook of evidence based practice (pp. 165–182). New York,
            NY: Oxford University Press.                             
          Leibert, T. W., Smith, J. B., & Agaskar, V. R. (2011). Relationship between the working alliance
            and social support on counseling outcome. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 67, 709–719.
          Levitt, T. (1975, September–October). Marketing myopia. Harvard Business Review, 19–31.
          Linssen, F., & Kerzbeck, U. (2002, September). Does solution-focused therapy work? Paper pre-
            sented at the meeting of the European Brief Therapy Association, Cardiff, Wales.

=== Page 328 (1 cols) ===
314   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Lipchik, E., Derks, J., Lacourt, M., & Nunnally, E. (2012). The evolution of solution-focused
        brief therapy. In C. Franklin, T. S. Trepper, W. J. Gingerich, & E. E. McCollum (Eds.),
        Solution-focused brief therapy: A handbook of evidence based practice (pp. 3–19). New York, NY:
        Oxford University Press.                                     
      Litrell, J. M. (1998). Brief counseling in action. New York, NY: Norton.
      Lloyd, H., & Dallos, R. (2008). First session solution-focused brief therapy with families who
        have children with severe intellectual disabilities: Mothers’ experiences and views. Journal of
        Family Therapy, 30, 5–28.                                    
      McGuire, W. J., & McGuire, C. V. (1996). Enhancing self-esteem by directed-thinking tasks:
        Cognitive and affective positivity asymmetries. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70,
        1117–1125.                                                   
      McKeel, J. (2012). What works in solution-focused brief therapy: A review of change pro-
        cess research. In C. Franklin, T. S. Trepper, W. J. Gingerich, & E. E. McCollum (Eds.),
        Solution-focused brief therapy: A handbook of evidence based practice (pp. 130–143). New York,
        NY: Oxford University Press.                                 
      McLeod, B. D. (2011). Relation of alliance with outcomes in youth psychotherapy: A meta-
        analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 31, 603–616.           
      Metcalf, L. (1997). Parenting toward solutions: How parents can use skills they already have to raise
        responsible, loving kids. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Simon & Schuster.
      Metcalf, L. (1998). Solution-focused group therapy. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
      Metcalf, L. (1999). Teaching toward solutions: Step-by-step strategies for handling academic, behavior
        and family issues in the classroom. New York, NY: Center for Applied Research.
      Metcalf, L. (2010). Solution-focused RTI: A positive and personalized approach to response-to-
        intervention. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.                
      Miller, S. D., Wampold, B. E., & Varhely, K. (2008). Direct comparisons of treatment modalities
        for childhood disorders: A meta-analysis. Psychotherapy Research, 18, 5–14.
      Mireas, R., & Inch, R. (2009). Brief solution-focused counseling: A practical effective strategy
        for dealing with wait lists in community mental health services. Social Work, 14, 63–70.
      Murphy, J. J. (1994). Working with what works: A solution-focused approach to school behavior
        problems. The School Counselor, 42, 59–65.                   
      Murphy, J. J. (2008). Solution-focused counseling in schools (2nd ed.). Alexandria, VA: American
        Counseling Association.                                      
      Murphy, J. J. (2013). Conducting student-driven interviews: Practical strategies for increasing student
        involvement and addressing behavior problems. New York, NY: Routledge.
      Murphy, J. J., & Davis, M. W. (2005). Video exceptions: An empirical case study involving a
        child with developmental disabilities. Journal of Systemic Therapies, 24, 66–79.
      Murphy, J. J., & Duncan, B. L. (2007). Brief intervention for school problems (2nd ed.).
        Outcome-informed strategies. New York, NY: Guilford Press.   
      Ness, M. E., & Murphy, J. J. (2001). The effect of inquiry technique on reports of pretreatment
        change by clients in a university counseling center. Journal of College Counseling, 4, 20–31.
      Newsome, S. (2004). Solution-focused brief therapy (SFBT) groupwork with at-risk junior high
        school students: Enhancing the bottom-line. Research on Social Work Practice, 14, 336–343.

=== Page 329 (1 cols) ===
Solution-Focused Approaches 315
                                                                     
          Norcross, J. C. (2010). The therapeutic relationship. In B. L. Duncan, S. D. Miller,
            B. E. Wampold, & M. A. Hubble (Eds.), The heart and soul of change: Delivering what works in
            therapy (2nd ed., pp. 113–141). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
                                                                     
          O’Hanlon, W. H., & Weiner-Davis, M. (2003).In search of solutions: A new direction in psychother-
            apy (rev. ed.). New York, NY: Norton.                    
          Orlinsky, D. E., Rønnestad, M. H., & Willutzki, U. (2004). Fifty years of psychotherapy
            process-outcomeresearch:Continuityandchange.InM.J.Lambert(Ed.),BerginandGarfield’s
            handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (5th ed., pp. 307–389). New York, NY: Wiley.
          Panayotov, P. A., Strahilov, B. E., & Anichkina, A. Y. (2012). Solution-focused brief ther-
            apy and medication adherence with schizophrenic patients. In C. Franklin, T. S. Trepper,
            W.J.Gingerich,&E.E.McCollum(Eds.),Solution-focusedbrieftherapy:Ahandbookofevidence
            based practice (pp. 196–202). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
          Pianta, R. C., & Stuhlman, M. W. (2004). Teacher-child relationships and children’s success in
            the first years of school. School Psychology Review, 33(3), 444–458.
                                                                     
          Prout, H. T., & Fedewa, A. (2014). Counseling and psychotherapy with children and adoles-
            cents: Historical, developmental, integrative, and effectivness perspectives. In H. T. Prout &
            A.Fedewa(Eds.),Counselingandpsychotherapywithchildrenandadolescents:Theoryandpractice
            for school and clinical settings (5th ed., pp. x–xx). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
          Rudolf, M., Christie, D., McElhone, S., Sahota, P., Dixey, R., Walker, J., & Wellings, C. (2006).
            WATCH IT: A community based programme for obese children and adolescents. Archives of
            Disease in Childhood, 91, 736–739.                       
          Saleebey, D. (2012). The strengths perspective in social work practice (6th ed.). Upper Saddle River,
            NJ: Pearson.                                             
          Selekman, M. (1993). Pathways to change: Brief therapy solutions with difficult adolescents. New
                                                                     
            York, NY: Guilford Press.                                
          Selekman, M. (2009). The adolescent and young adult self-harming treatment manual: A collaborative
            strengths-based brief therapy approach. New York, NY: Norton.
          Shah, I. (1983). The exploits of the incomparable Mulla Nasrudin. London, England: Octagon Press.
          Sharry, J. (2007). Solution-focused groupwork (2nd ed.). London, England: Sage.
          Shirk, S. R., & Karver, M. S. (2011). Alliance in child and adolescent psychotherapy.
            In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-based responsiveness
            (2nd ed., pp. 70–91). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
          Simon,J.,&Nelson,T.(2004).Resultsoflastsessioninterviewsinsolution-focusedbrieftherapy:
            Learning from clients. Journal of Family Psychotherapy, 15, 27–45.
          Sklare, G. B. (2004). Brief counseling that works: A solution-focused approach for school counselors
                                                                     
            and administrators (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin. 
          Springer, D. W., Lynch, C., & Rubin, A. (2000). Effects of a solution-focused mutual aid group
            for Hispanic children of incarcerated parents. Child & Adolescent Social Work Journal, 17,
            431–442.                                                 
          Storey, K., & Post, M. (2012). Positive behavior supports in classrooms and schools. Springfield, IL:
            Thomas.

=== Page 330 (1 cols) ===
316   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Trepper, T. S., McCollum, E. E., De Jong, P., Korman, H., Gingerich, W. J., & Franklin, C.
        (2012). Solution-focused brief therapy treatment manual. In C. Franklin, T. S. Trepper,
        W. J. Gingerich, & E. E. McCollum (Eds.), Solution-focused brief therapy: A handbook of
        evidence-based practice (pp. 20–38). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
      Wachtel, P. L. (2011). Therapeutic communication: Knowing what to say when. New York, NY:
        Guilford Press.                                              
      Watzlawick, P., Weakland, J., & Fisch, R. (1974). Change: Principles of problem formation and
        problem resolution. New York, NY: Norton.                    
      Weiner-Davis, M. (2001). The divorce remedy: The proven 7-step program for saving your marriage.
        New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.                              
      Weiner-Davis, M., de Shazer, S., & Gingerich, W. (1987). Using pretreatment change to con-
        struct a therapeutic solution: An exploratory study. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 13,
        359–363.                                                     
      Wheeler, J., & Hogg, V. (2012). Signs of safety and child protection movement. In C. Franklin,
        T. S. Trepper, W. J. Gingerich, & E. E. McCollum (Eds.), Solution-focused brief therapy: A
        handbook of evidence based practice (pp. 203–215). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
      Wolin, S., Desetta, A., & Hefner, K. (2000). A leader’s guide to the struggle to be strong: How to
        foster resilience in teens. Minneapolis, MN: Free Spirit.

=== Page 331 (1 cols) ===
CHAPTER                             
                                   9                                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                     Systemic      Approaches                        
                                                                     
                                                                     
                             Family Therapy                          
                                                                     
           W                                                         
             ILLIAM                                                  
                 B. G                                                
                    UNN                                              
                        J                                            
                        R                                            
                         ., J                                        
                          ONI                                        
                             H                                       
                              ALEY                                   
                                 , A                                 
                                   NNE                               
                                      M. P                           
                                         ROUTY                       
                                              ,                      
                                              AND                    
                                                  J                  
                                                  ANET               
                                                      R              
                                                       OBERTSON      
          T  he systemic theories of psychotherapy are unique in considering the dynamic
             relationship between symptomology and the interpersonal context in which these
          symptoms occur. Systems theorists believe that the system (e.g., a family) is made up of
          complex relationship patterns between its members and between its members and the
          outside world. These patterns lead to clinically relevant symptoms. For example, Family
          A has a 7-year-old daughter who is depressed and withdrawn. In addition to considering
          the unique characteristics of the girl, a family therapist would view the family itself as a
          unit of focus. In the same way, symptoms of depression and withdrawal in various family
          members are viewed as being maintained by the structure, patterns, and beliefs of the
          family. In turn, the depression and withdrawal permit the family to operate with the least
          amount of change and the most amount of predictability. Systemic thinking represents a
          dramatic epistemologicalshift from other approachesto psychotherapy,particularlywith
          the premise that etiology and history are less relevant than an understanding of current
          family structure, interaction patterns, and belief systems. Following early development
          of these theories and interventions another wave of narrative and solution-oriented
          approaches were described and embraced, particularly for families and therapists who
          were only focused on the problems and not on the positive aspects of families. More
          recently, these theories have expanded further to include being able to increase the
          depth and breadth of thinking and possible interventions. Systemic thinking and
          family therapy have contributed greatly to the ways in which children, adolescents, and
          families can receive assistance.                           
                                   317

=== Page 332 (1 cols) ===
318   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        Our overview theory described in this chapter is a systemically grounded approach
      to treating children, adolescents, and their families. It integrates general systems the-
      ory with the major schools of family therapy that have evolved over the last 40 years,
      each focusing on a different aspect of family dynamics or an approach to treatment.
      Family therapy is much more than an additional technique in the mental health practi-
      tioner’s bag of tricks. Family therapy represents a worldview that encompasses the entire
      treatment process: conceptualizing, assessing, and intervening.
      HISTORICAL  PERSPECTIVE                                        
      The decade following World War II was formative for the family therapy movement.
      Goldenberg and Goldenberg (1985) point to five seemingly independent scientific and
      clinical developments that together set the stage for the emergence of family therapy
      (p. 90). The first one was the adaptation of psychoanalytic formulations to the study of
      the family. Nathan Ackerman, a psychoanalyst and child psychiatrist, is credited with
      extending this orientation beyond the inner life of individuals to the individuals within
      their family, community, and social contexts. Second, general systems theory, proposed
      by Ludwig von Bertalanffy, was adapted to family systems. This theory created a unique
      perspective for understanding symptoms. The third development was research into
      the area of schizophrenia. During the 1950s, three independent research teams (led by
      Gregory Bateson at the Mental Research Institute in California, Ted Lidz at Yale, and
      Murray Bowen at the National Institute of Mental Health) all arrived at a similar con-
      clusion: There is a strong relationship between family processes and the development of
      schizophrenia. Each team developed different explanations for this correlation, but the
      basic conclusion helped open the door to family therapy for the treatment of disorders
      previously believed to be solely intrapsychic conflicts. Fourth, the areas of marriage
      counseling and child guidance emerged early in this century and provided a foundation
      for family therapy later in the 1950s. Finally, there was the beginning of group therapy
                                                                     
      approaches, which had emerged around 1910 as a new treatment approach. The
      extension of group principles to families (a natural group) was a logical step.
        Family therapy is approximately 60 years old. The first three decades could be
      characterized as the foundational years. Many family therapists, beginning as physicians
      or researchers, began to question traditional individually oriented approaches. Several
      treated families without interacting with other professionals for fear of ostracism.
      Researchers began to speculate about the nature of the relationship between family
                                                                     
      dynamics and intrapsychic pathology. During the 1970s, family therapy proliferated
      and diversity emerged. Several camps of theories and therapies developed including
      Inter-generational (Bowen, Boszormenyi-Nagy, de Framo, Paul, and Williamson),
      Behavioral (Stuart, Jacobsen, and Liberman), Structural (Minuchin and Aponte),

=== Page 333 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 319
                                                                     
          Strategic (Watzlawick, Haley, Madanes, Hoffman, and Papp), MRI (Bateson and
          Jackson), Milan Systemic (Selvini-Palazzoli), often placed within the strategic school
                                                                     
          of therapy; and the Experiential (Whitaker and Satir). The late 1970s and 1980s were
          characterized by divergence and specialization. Family therapists worked in many clini-
          cal settings, with a wide variety of problems, integrating family therapy with individual
          therapy, addictions recovery, and medicine. Family therapy became more integrated
          into the broader mental health culture. During the 1980s and 1990s approaches were
          added, which have been labeled postmodern, narrative, or constructivist. These include
          Solution-Focused (de Shazer), Narrative (White and Epston), and competency-focused
                                                                     
          (Waters and Lawrence). These additions engage families to activate their internal
          resources and competencies to create unique solutions or even to reconstruct how they
          interact with difficult problems. In the past 15 years there has been more development
          of increasing the focus on “depth” and “breadth” approaches. Affective depth strategies
          such as Internal Family Systems (Schwartz) or Emotionally Focused Couple and
          Family Therapy (Johnson and Whiffen) address the core emotional issues between
                                                                     
          family members. Breadth approaches such as Medical Family Therapy (McDaniel,
          Doherty, and Hepworth) utilize a biopsychosocial approach to include the biological
          and community impacts on families.                         
            The first journal in the field, Family Process, was started in 1962. Today, there are
          well over a dozen journals and hundreds of books published on family therapy. A unique
          publication, the Family Therapy Networker (now named the Psychotherapy Networker)
          provides discussion of topical issues and is an excellent resource for upcoming workshops
                                                                     
          and seminars. The American Association of Marriage and Family Therapy (AAMFT)
          publishes a clinical/research journal, the Journal of Marriage and Family Therapy, and
          a professional magazine, the Family Therapy Magazine, which keeps readers informed
          about national clinical trends and legislative efforts in the field. The journal of the Col-
          laborative Family Healthcare Association, Families, Systems, and Health focuses on the
          interaction of health-related issues and families. This journal often has articles that look
          at treating the health issues of children and adolescents. There are several dozen family
                                                                     
          journals published all over the world, including Britain, Australia, Japan, New Zealand,
          and Finland. The International Family Therapy Association’s journal, the Journal of
          Family Psychotherapy, focuses on clinical and training advances worldwide.
            There are several professional associations for family therapists. The AAMFT is the
          largest (about 24,000 members) and serves to set the standards of the profession in the
          United States and Canada and to promote the profession. The Commission on Accred-
                                                                     
          itation for Marriage and Family Therapy Education (COAMFTE) was established by
          AAMFT in the 1970s. The COAMFTE is officially recognized by the Federal Depart-
          ment of Education as the accrediting organization for marriage and family therapy train-
          ing programs. There are more than 100 programs accredited in North America to teach

=== Page 334 (1 cols) ===
320   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      marriage and family therapy. The second main organization, the American Family Ther-
      apyAcademy(AFTA),isanacademyofadvancedprofessionals—athinktankcomposed
      of approximately 500 members who meet yearly to share ideas and to develop common
      interests.TherearenowseveralothersincludingtheInternationalFamilyTherapyAsso-
      ciation, the California Association of Marriage and Family Therapists, and a specialist
      section within the National Council on Family Relations, the Association of Family
      Therapy and Systemic Practice within the United Kingdom.       
      OVERVIEW  OF THEORY                                            
      In describing the theoretical differences between systemic or interpersonal therapies and
      intrapsychic therapies, the metaphor of a camera is often used. In individual therapies,
      the lensis focusedonthe thoughts, feelings,orexperienceofthe client.Inallapproaches
      to family therapy, the lens is widened from the individual to the relational context in
      whichindividualslive:primarilythefamily.However,familytherapyapproachesdifferin
      terms of their specific focus on observations, hypotheses, and interventions. This section
      provides an overview, and highlights the important theoretical components of several
      widely used systemic approaches.                               
      Structure and Organization—Structural Family Therapy           
      Emphasis on the structure and organization of family systems is a crucial factor in the
      approach developed by Minuchin (1974). Three key structural concepts are: subsystems,
                                                                     
      hierarchy (guidance and leadership),boundaries (closeness and distance), anddevelopment
      (normal changes in development over time).                     
        Subsystems in a family are individuals, dyads, or larger groups who make up a subset of
      the family. While some subsystems are natural (e.g., the parental team or sibling group),
      there are others unique to a particular family. For example, a mother and youngest child
      can form a subsystem such that everyone else is excluded. From the formation of this
      alliance or coalition, problems may develop. A therapist evaluates the function of the
                                                                     
      family in terms of hierarchy, roles, and boundaries (interrelationship rules) of these sub-
      systems, as well as of the whole family.                       
        All systems, including families, need to maintain some hierarchy and leadership to
      move through normal developmental stages as well as manage acute crises. This usu-
      ally involves the adults being able to make decisions that are in the best interests of the
      children and the family. A common problem described in adolescence is an inverted
                                                                     
      hierarchy (Haley, 1980) in which adolescents are directing their parents. Another is
      when adults abdicate family leadership duties and covertly require children to take on
      adult roles within the family; this is commonly referred to as a parental or parentified
      child (Haley, 1987). The latter can be differentiated from appropriate childhood chores,

=== Page 335 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 321
                                                                     
          like babysitting younger siblings, because in appropriate circumstances the adults main-
          tain the authority of making the rules, the child’s responsibilities are clearly delineated,
                                                                     
          and the child receives overt support and direction from the adult.
            Boundaries are invisible barriers, often compared to cell membranes that surround
          individuals and subsystems and regulate the amount of closeness within itself and with
          other subsystems. Boundaries can be described as internal: between family members/
          subsystems, or external: between family members and their neighbors, friends, or school.
          If boundaries are thin or loose, closeness is emphasized over autonomy. If the boundaries
          are thick and rigid, the reverse is true. Culture, geography, mobility of the family, polit-
                                                                     
          ical climate, and neighborhood safety are just a few of the larger systems dynamics that
          can influence how permeable and flexible boundaries are within and around a family.
          Minuchin (1974) described boundaries on a continuum between rigid and diffuse. Rigid
          boundariesareoverlyrestrictiveandpermitlittlecontactwithotherfamilysubsystemsor
          externalsystems.Familieswithrigidinternalboundariestendtobedisengagedfromeach
          other. Children in such families often feel isolated or neglected. “Acting out” problems
          like conduct disorder can be more prevalent. On the other end of the continuum, fam-
                                                                     
          ilies with diffuse internal boundaries tend to be enmeshed (e.g., overly supportive; may
          learn to rely too heavily on each other). “Acting in” problems like anorexia and depres-
          sion can result. Families with rigid external boundaries tend to create overdependence
          on each other and isolation from others. In families with diffuse external boundaries, it is
          difficult for family members to feel connected with each other. The important contribu-
          tion of a structural assessment to a unified theory is its focus on organization, particularly
          concepts of hierarchy (who is up and who is down) and boundaries (who is in and who
                                                                     
          is out). It enables a therapist to see strengths that can be emphasized with a family (you
          have developed a very close bond with your daughter), as well as identify themes for
          therapy and change. (In addition, it will be important for her to develop some ability to
          handle disappointment on her own.)                         
                                                                     
          Family Development                                         
                                                                     
          Another structural component to consider is its stage of development. Individuals go
          through various stages of development, and families can be seen as doing so as well.
          Even as family structures have changed over the past several decades, there are still pre-
          dictable times of transitions—stages—as a family moves through time. McGoldrick and
          Shibusawa (2012) suggest that the “central underlying processes to be negotiated are
          the expansion, contraction, and realignment of the relationship system to support the
                                                                     
          entry, exit and development of family members in a functional way” (p. 385). They pro-
          pose the following stages of the family life cycle: young adulthood; coupling/marriage;
          families with young children; families with adolescents; families at midlife—launching
          adult children; and the family in later life. These predictable transitions alter the family

=== Page 336 (1 cols) ===
322   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      structure (boundaries, hierarchy) and/or require a shift in the ways the family mem-
      bers relate to each other. In addition to these predictable transition points, there are
      unpredictable, yet not uncommon, events that also require a shift in family structures,
      roles, and boundaries. Accidents, illnesses, unemployment, natural disasters, divorce,
      and remarriage can lead to disequilibrium and reorganization of roles and boundaries.
      Individuals within families may exhibit emotional, behavioral, or medical symptoms if
      the family lacks the flexibility to accomplish the tasks of reorganization necessary to
      accommodate the new stage of development.                      
      The Feminist Critique of Structural Family Therapy             
      In the mid-1980s, there was a reaction against the mechanistic way that therapists, par-
      ticularly structural therapists, described families. The critique was that this approach
      did not take the interpersonal and historical aspects of gender, class, and culture into
      consideration. The conceptualization of the overinvolved mother and the peripheral
      father was seen as another way of collaborating with sexist, patriarchal social rules by
      pathologizing the mother and bringing fathers to the rescue. Feminists contended that
      mothers were overinvolved and insecure, not because of some personal flaw, but because
      a sexist society had delineated emotional and relational work as invisible, not valuable,
      and feminine, which left women emotionally isolated and often in economically depen-
      dent positions. This was a product of a sexist historical process hundreds of years in
      the making (e.g., Goldner, 1985). These writers and therapists contended that it was
      important to look at gender roles as being limiting for both males and females, and to
      challenge both to be part of the solution. They saw an unconscious bias toward view-
      ing mothers as having the major responsibility for child rearing and housework at the
      expense of their own careers and lives (Anderson, 1995). They encouraged therapists to
      examine their own biases; and their implicit beliefs about roles, duties, responsibilities,
      and rewards in regard to both men and women (e.g., Goldner, 1991; Hare-Mustin &
      Marcek, 1988; Silverstein & Goodrich, 2003). More recently, feminists have demanded
      that therapists also look at their racist and heterosexist assumptions and families’ cul-
      turally congruent traditions that support taking responsibility for both women and men
      to be engaged in emotional and practical family work (e.g., Hays, 1996; Killian, 2003;
      Long & Serovich, 2003; Mac Kune-Karrer & Weigel Foy, 2003; Pearlman, 1996; Pin-
      derhughes, 2002; Tamasese, 2003; Tien & Olson, 2003; Tubbs & Rosenblatt, 2003).
      The concept of intersectionality (Prouty, 2014; Silverstein & Goodrich, 2003) facili-
      tates therapists’ examinations of how power intersects with gender, culture, class, sexual
                                                                     
      orientation, relationship orientation, country of citizenship, age, physical ability, immi-
      gration history and many other aspects of identity. This way of looking at intersections
      helps therapists to think about how each aspect of their identity enables or provides

=== Page 337 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 323
                                                                     
          barriers to social power. Intersectionality also encourages therapists to think about how
          identity and access to power both change as a person’s context changes (Hernández &
                                                                     
          McDowell, 2010; Prouty, 2014).                             
          Interactional Patterns—Strategic Family Therapy            
                                                                     
          A second aspect of family functioning is the actual problem-maintaining sequences of
          behaviors or patterns of interactions. If the sequences that maintain the symptoms can
          be changed, then the symptom is no longer necessary. Thus, symptoms are viewed as
                                                                     
          maintained by and simultaneously maintaining repetitive cycles of interaction. Patterns
          of interaction are redundant sequences of behavior that may recur across many different
          content areas. For example, a mother is talking to her oldest son when her daughter
          interrupts. The father criticizes the daughter for interrupting and the mother criticizes
          the father for being too harsh. The son gets upset about being ignored and leaves the
          room.Thissimplepatternmayberepeatedoverandoverinthisfamily,utilizingdifferent
          topics to begin the sequence.                              
                                                                     
            In addition to interactions, rules and roles become part of symptom maintenance.
          Rules govern power, division of labor, and patterns of interaction in a family. Some rules
          are overtly stated (e.g., a rotation of dishwashing or taking out the trash). However,
          many family rules are covert and not talked about openly, for example, going to your
          room when your parents are fighting or not talking to a parent who has been drinking.
          Roles are a natural extension of rules. For example, the mother may be the nurturer, the
          father the disciplinarian, the oldest son the hero, the second son the troublemaker, and
                                                                     
          youngest daughter the cute peacemaker who makes everyone laugh.
            When these patterns prevent the system from accomplishing its tasks, symptoms may
          develop. The symptomatic behavior (e.g., a child refusing to go to school) is dysfunc-
          tional from the school’s point of view, but may be logical within the interpersonal net-
          work of the family. If the parent of such a child is depressed and suicidal, the child’s
          “protective” behavior may serve to stabilize the system. Thus, the symptom is adaptive
          for the family.                                            
                                                                     
            In their book Change,Principles ofProblem Formationand ProblemResolution,Watzlaw-
          ick, Weakland, and Fisch (1974) emphasized that families are always trying to adapt and
          adjust to changing circumstances while also trying to avoid change and its uncertainties.
          Thus, when confronted with normal life difficulties, families found solutions to resolve
          their ambivalence about change. It is these solutions that become the presenting prob-
          lems. If the system, or individuals within them, can create new solutions that do not turn
                                                                     
          difficulties into problems, the symptom will no longer exist. These new, problem-free
          solutions require the system to create new rules, and thereby a slightly different system.
          This form of change is called second-order change because morphogenesis is required.

=== Page 338 (1 cols) ===
324   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      However, the families with whom therapists work have often attempted to solve their
      own problems, but have instead substituted problems for problems: This is called
      first-order change. Watzlawick et al. (1974) focused on three common types of solutions
      families construct for difficulties that then become problems and rigid problematic
      sequences. The first are those in which some action needs to be taken, but the family
      does not act. An example of this type of problem development would be failure to alter
      parenting style as a child becomes an adolescent. This can result in increased rebellion
      and power struggles. A second way problem sequences develop is when actions toward
      a difficulty are taken when there is no need to do so. These are situations where the
      solution or cure becomes the problem. A couple who has the idea that they will always
      insist on strict obedience from their children may create a negative environment by
      their constant action and unwillingness to pick their battles carefully. The third way
      problematic sequences develop is when there is a problem and an action is taken, but
      it is at the wrong level of intervention. For example, parents may try to cheer up an
      adolescent who is depressed. When these attempts do not succeed, the parents may try
      harder with more of the same actions. The result can be an increasingly withdrawn
      and angry teenager who feels controlled and manipulated. Both parents and child can
      become engaged in a pattern that does not relieve the symptoms, but actually leads
      to their increase as a consequence of the misdirected solution. (For a more complete
      discussion of first- and second-order change, see Keeney, 2002).
      Belief Systems—Changing the Meaning                            
      An important factor affecting the development of structure and patterns in a family
      are their belief systems. The basic theoretical premise of this view is that family mem-
      bers attribute meaning to behavior within a context and the meaning becomes more
      important than the behavior. For example, one family may define a child’s behavior as
      cute and amusing while another family may define similar behavior as unacceptable.
      Behavior is far less significant than the meaning attached to it. Behavior is also analyzed
      through the context in which it occurs. Similar behavior may take on different meaning
      in different contexts. A child interrupting a parent at a social gathering may elicit pun-
      ishment, whereas a child interrupting a parent to warn of an approaching danger may
      be praised. The interpersonal context in which behaviors occur is crucial to a systemic
      therapist. A child may behave very differently at home when one parent is present com-
      paredwithwhenbothparentsarepresent.Schoolbehaviorsmaybetotallydifferentthan
      those at home, and certainly behavior with peers may be even more diverse. An analysis
                                                                     
      of as many settings as possible to discover what happens when and who is involved is
      important in developing hypotheses about the problem and designing interventions.
        Family beliefs are constantly evolving. Problems develop when previous beliefs do not
      fit the current situation. Moreover, problems develop because of the meaning families

=== Page 339 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 325
                                                                     
          attribute to the situation. If new information can be given to family members to help
          them understand their behavior in a new way, change can occur.
                                                                     
          Circularity                                                
                                                                     
          Circularity is a key concept in all family therapy approaches but was most central
          to the Milan, MRI, and Ackerman groups. The belief systems of family members are
          usually linear, that is, they explain events as cause-effect phenomena. Steve did this;
          then Jenny did that. However, to understand the nature and impact of a family’s belief
                                                                     
          system, a circular view of events must be employed. Circularity is the concept that
          problems are maintained by patterns of interaction between people that have no clear
          beginning or end. Circularity maintains a focus on present patterns and emphasizes
          the reciprocal nature of behavior, thus including all family members in a problem.
          Behavior problems in a child are not thought of as being caused by poor self-esteem
          or divorcing parents. Circular thinking does not permit individuals in the family to be
          identified as villains or heroes. There is no extensive search for the cause of a child’s
                                                                     
          misbehavior, only a clear description of what maintains it in the present. In fact, there
          is a search for positive intention and competency to assist family members in seeing
          the story in a more positive light. A circular hypothesis examines the relationship
          between the system and the symptom and provides for interventions that impact the
          entire system.                                             
            Beliefs define the rules, roles, interaction patterns, and structure of the family, while
          these in turn define the family’s belief. The interdependence of these relationships is
                                                                     
          graphically depicted in Figure 9.1. For example, if a parent believes her child cannot be
          trusted, she may overcontrol the child’s behavior, thus making it difficult for the child
          to learn how to respond to different situations. If the child is given some freedom and
                                                                     
                                                                     
                       STRUCTURE                                     
                       Subsystems                                    
                                                                     
                        Boundaries                                   
                                                                     
                         Hierarchy                                   
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                     Meaning Context                                 
                                              Rules                  
                                              Roles                  
                                           Interactions              
                                BELIEFS                              
                                              PATTERNS               
          Figure 9.1 Important components of overview theory.

=== Page 340 (1 cols) ===
326   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      acts in a way that displeases the parent, her belief that the child is not trustworthy will
      be reinforced.                                                 
      Solution-Focused Therapies                                     
      Solution-oriented and solution-focused therapies (de Shazer, 1991; O’Hanlon &
      Weiner-Davis, 1989) represent collaborative, postmodern frameworks that also focus
      on families’ belief systems and the meaning the families attribute to the problems
      for which they seek help. However, unlike the general systemic therapies mentioned
      previously, the emphasis is on finding solutions rather than understanding the problems.
      Another distinction between solution-focused therapies and other systemic therapies is
      the underlying assumption that families do want to change, and that individuals have
      their own perspective. Therefore, the concept of right or wrong is not a useful one
      (with obvious exceptions like violence). For the most part, problems are considered to
      be a part of everyday experience rather than a sign of pathology. Clients are considered
      experts on their own experience. The therapist’s job is threefold: (1) to acknowledge
      and validate the clients’ experience; (2) to guide clients as they shift either their
      behavior (what they “do”) related to the problem or their perceptions (how they
      “view”), the problem; and (3) to build on the clients’ existing strengths and resources.
      Narrative Therapy                                              
      Similar to solution-focused therapy, narrative therapy represents a collaborative, post-
      modern framework. Narrative therapy is part of the social constructionist movement
      of family therapy, which describes reality as constructed through interactions and con-
      versations with others (White & Epston, 1990). Michael White and David Epston’s
      theory of narrative therapy is based on the work of Michel Foucault, a French intel-
                                                                     
      lect who wrote about constructed ideas having influence on people’s lives (White &
      Epston, 1990). White and Epston (1990) propose that the meanings and beliefs of fam-
      ilies are constructed through multiple personal, sociopolitical, and cultural life stories.
      These dominant stories impact family functioning and have the potential to maintain
      problems within the family system.                             
        Narrative therapy (Freeman, Epston, & Lobovitz, 1997; Marner, 2000; Smith &
      Nylund, 1997; Vetere & Dowling, 2005) suggests that each of us has the ability to
                                                                     
      externalize and question the old, dominant stories, and to generate new stories about
      the past, the present, and the future. Narrative therapy emphasizes how language plays
      a vital role in creating meaning, and that the act of naming aspects of our clients’
      lives gives validity to experiences. Problem-saturated stories become the background
      as children, teens, and their families begin to notice unique outcomes and sparkling
      moments in which they live together without the problem dominating their lives.

=== Page 341 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 327
                                                                     
          Newer Theories—Focus on Depth and Breadth                  
                                                                     
          Internal Family Systems                                    
          RichardSchwartz(1997)developedtheInternalFamilySystems(IFS)modelafterwork-
          ing for many years with adult clients struggling with trauma and eating disorders. The
                                                                     
          IFS model begins the idea of the multiplicity of the mind (e.g., part of me thinks this,
          yet another part of me wants that) and then applies basic systems and structural family
          therapy concepts, enabling clients to understand and access their own internal system.
          The ideas of boundaries, structure, homeostasis, negative and positive feedback are all
          essential therapeutic concepts with family systems, as well as when addressing the inter-
          nal systems and subsystems using the IFS model. Like with many other systemic models
          the concepts of balance, harmony, leadership, and development are extremely important
                                                                     
          (Schwartz, 1997).                                          
            Within the IFS model persons have many subpersonalities, called Parts, that are ide-
          ally mediated through a central Self. In IFS, the Self is the conductor or coordinator,
          “the I” (Schwartz, p. 37), and is a person’s compassionate core. The Self provides clarity,
          perspective, and empathy for both oneself and for others. Being in the Self provides the
          sense of peace and of being centered; it is the “seat of consciousness” (p. 40). As people
                                                                     
          experience life they develop personality Parts. Some of the Parts perform one of three
          specific roles: exiles, managers, and firefighters. Exile parts are most commonly devel-
          oped during traumatic experiences. They contain memories and extreme emotions such
          as helplessness, shame, and terror. They arise in situations, often in childhood, when a
          person is without power to escape or protect oneself. When re-experiencing these mem-
          ories and/or emotions is overwhelming, these parts are internally exiled, tucked into
          an internal closet. Thus, exiled parts are a primary example of the internal system try-
                                                                     
          ing to maintain homeostasis and harmony, but doing so in an extreme and unbalanced
          way. What is important to note here is that exiled parts are usually excluded from the
          person’s cognitive and emotional development. Keeping these parts exiled, and hidden
          from the Self requires a lot of internal energy. This energy is funneled into developing
          parts whose job it is to maintain the exiled part’s banishment. The first of these parts
          is called a manager. Like the name suggests, managers are usually the cognitively and
          emotionally methodical parts. In their pursuit of an exile’s banishment they can grow
                                                                     
          too powerful, and their development is stymied due to their narrow focus. The rules of
          the internal system cannot evolve. Managers can range from functional to extreme. For
          example, a manager can be a part that is superorganized but can grow too extreme by
          exhibiting symptoms of obsessive control, such as “perfection,” or someone who is too
          focused on validation from others. Sometimes it is so extreme that managers supersede
          the Self, throwing a person’s internal system out of harmony in an effort to rigidly main-
                                                                     
          tain a homeostasis of the exiled part, but prevents both consistent Self-leadership and

=== Page 342 (1 cols) ===
328   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      normal internal system maturation. When managers are unable to reliably maintain an
      exiled part’s banishment or when there are several exiled parts, a more extreme part can
      develop. Firefighters have the same goals as managers, but have more extravagant meth-
      ods that often have distraction or appeasement of the exile’s emotional terror at their
      core. In this way their aim is internal system homeostasis, but their methods are extreme
      and usually dangerous. Often firefighter tactics are extreme enough to warrant a mental
      health diagnosis, such as an addiction, an eating disorder, or violent behavior. Firefighter
      tactics may seem irrational to outsiders, but once the internal system is understood, the
      rules of parts’ roles and homeostatic dynamics can become clear.
        The role of the IFS therapist is to help the client understand her own parts—and one’s
      partner’s parts in couple therapy. Balance, harmony, Self-leadership, and continued
      development are the goals. Therapists work from a strengths-based, empathic position
      that evolves from Self-directed leadership within their own internal systems. Several
      articles (e.g., Johnson & Schwartz, 2000; Wark, Tomas, & Peterson, 2001) and books
      (e.g., Sweezy & Ziskind, 2013) are available, as well as official training seminars
      (www.selfleadership.org) if one wants further training in Internal Family System’s
      therapy. What is important to note is that this model can be used at many levels, and
      most of the interventions from other systemic intervention models can be used to help
      a person find the strengths and resources to develop Self-leadership, rebalance one’s
      internal system, and to help partners to be in charge of how their internal systems
      interact. IFS can be done with individuals and with more than one person in the room,
      such as with couple therapy.                                   
      Medical Family Therapy                                         
      Medical Family Therapy (MedFT) was first described as a theoretical model in 1992 in
      a book by Susan McDaniel, Jeri Hepworth, and Bill Doherty. The second edition of this
      book was published in 2013. MedFT is based on the biopsychosocial approach outlined
      by George Engel (1980). It expands family therapy concepts to include looking closely
      at the biological system of physical symptoms and diagnoses and how this interacts with
      family relationships and the relationships between the school and the family. Several
      graduatetrainingprogramsinfamilytherapynowfocusalargepartoftheircurriculumon
      this model and set of techniques. For children, adolescents, and their families it provides
      a way of thinking about the interaction of chronic medical conditions in the child or
      another family member that helps in understanding problematic behaviors and patterns
      in the family. It strongly encourages developing close collaboration between primary
                                                                     
      care medical providers, schools, behavioral health providers, and the family in creating
      a joint treatment plan.

=== Page 343 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 329
                                                                     
          GENERAL THERAPEUTIC  GOALS  AND TECHNIQUES                 
                                                                     
          In the space availableinthis chapter, itisimpossibleto describeallthe techniquesdevel-
          oped from systemic theory. In this section, we briefly outline a few that correspond to
          the theories of family functioning described earlier: Structural, Strategic, Belief systems,
                                                                     
          and the postmodern approaches of the Solution-focused and Narrative therapy models.
          Interventions from directed play therapy, Internal Family Systems therapy, and Medical
          Family Therapy are also provided. The interventions therapists choose depend on their
          own theory of change and the fit for the family as the therapist can determine which of
          the family experiences may be more helpful on which to focus.
                                                                     
          Structural Interventions                                   
                                                                     
          With a structural emphasis, a therapist joins with the family, maps structural dynamics
          such as hierarchy and boundaries, and has the family enact patterns that give them new
          possibilities for alternative relationships. Minuchin and Fishman’s (1981) book Family
                                                                     
          Therapy Techniques provides detailed descriptions of interventions into the structure/
          organization of the family. Salvador Minuchin is still practicing and writing and runs the
          Minuchin Center for the Family in New York City. In his most recent book, The Craft of
          FamilyTherapy:ChallengingCertainties(Minuchin,Reiter,&Borda,2013),heemphasizes
          the therapist’s use of self as the key change agent regardless of the techniques used. This
          ability to “roll up your sleeves” and connect with the family on a personal, affective level
          is key to seeing patterns and making change happen. Structural family therapist, David
                                                                     
          Waters, in Charlottesville, Virginia, trains therapists in regard to structures and patterns:
          the key elements of therapy are to “See Them,” “Name Them,” and “Change Them.”
            Joining is a technique by which a therapist works to understand and accept each per-
          son’s position in the family. The family often approaches therapy with some anxiety and
          guilt, and it is important to connect with each member. Failure to join and accommo-
          date to the way things are may produce resistance to therapeutic interventions. Joining
          includes, but is not limited to, the initial session. It occurs throughout therapy and does
                                                                     
          not always mean listening and being nice. Often it involves saying something that is
          painful, but real in the experience of one or more family members.
            Mapping the family structure involves two stages. In planning for sessions, the thera-
          pist makes some hypotheses about structure, asking questions such as: Who seems most
          powerful? What relationships might be disengaged from each other? Is the hierarchy
          functional? These questions or hypotheses continue to be generated throughout ther-
          apy. The second stage of mapping involves testing these hypotheses by watching the
                                                                     
          family interact as well as talk to each other.

=== Page 344 (1 cols) ===
330   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        As opposed to spontaneous behavioral interactions in which families produce a sam-
      ple of problematic exchanges within the therapy session without any suggestion from the
      therapist, enactments involve asking the family to provide an example of the problem or
      to talk about difficult subjects, or to try a different interaction during the session in front
      of the therapist. Both spontaneous interactions and enactments can be used to high-
      light or modify interactions by encouraging family members to unravel covert rules that
      are sabotaging constructive interactions or to behave in new, competent ways that will
      lead to new rules for relationships and people’s roles within their family. For example, a
      mother and daughter who are in a constant battle for control may be asked to engage in
      a different kind of interaction. In a soft tone, sitting in close proximity to the mother,
      the therapist may ask the mother to talk in a soft tone, sit next to her daughter, and talk
      to her about her concerns for the daughter’s safety.           
      Pattern Interventions                                          
      An emphasis on changing the patterns of interaction involves different kinds of
      interventions. The therapist is more interested in changing the symptom maintaining
      sequences than on changing the structure. Precise questioning about the process
      occurring around the problem and attempted problem solutions is important. Tasks are
      often assigned to alter these sequences.                       
        The questions asked in the initial interviews revolve around who does what, how,
      and when the problem occurs. This not only provides information about the process,
      but also about the possible functionality of the symptom for the overall system. Haley
      (1987) provides an excellent description of such an initial interview.
        In these initial sessions, family members present their view of the problem and of the
      solutionsthathavebeentried.Itisthesesolutionsthatoftenareaddressedbytherapeutic
      interventions. After a clear problem definition is agreed on, the family and therapist set
      goals for therapy. This is often the most difficult phase of therapy. Presenting problems,
      such as we want to communicate more, tend to be vague and families have more ideas
      about what they do not want than what they do want. However, in order for the strate-
      gically designed interventions that follow to be effective, this problem definition/goal
      setting is crucial.                                            
        Assignment of tasks to be completed outside of the sessions, homework, is a primary
      intervention utilized by therapists focused on altering patterns. Tasks can be direct or
      paradoxical. Straightforward directives are given with a rationale designed to correspond
      to the goals agreed on in the initial sessions. If therapeutic rapport is developed and
                                                                     
      resistance to change is low, the family will be able to carry these out. Attention is paid
      to the way in which families carry out the assigned tasks. Their level of resistance to
      change can be gauged by whether they carry out the task exactly, modify the task, or fail
      to do it at all.

=== Page 345 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 331
                                                                     
            Paradoxical interventions are designed to counter strong resistance to change
          (Watzlawick et al., 1974). The usual method is to ask the family not to change, to go
                                                                     
          slow in changing, or to continue the symptom. These directives are given with the
          intent that the family will be placed in a bind. If they follow the directives, they are
          exercising control over these symptoms. If they do not comply, the symptoms change.
          These interventions have been extremely controversial with proponents arguing they
          are congruent and respectful of the family’s fear of change while others argue that
          they are tricky and manipulative. The key variable seems to be the rationale that
          accompanies the directive and the degree to which the therapist believes it to be true.
                                                                     
          If paradoxical interventions become routine statements used in every case, they are
          not likely to be as effective as if they come out of the family’s efforts in therapy, and
          are designed to have unique meaning to the family. In addition, Cloe Madanes (1981)
          described another type of paradoxical intervention. She advocated the use of “pretend”
          techniques to playfully confront destructive patterns. For example, a symptomatic child
          is asked to pretend to have the symptom and the parents are encouraged to pretend
          to help. The child can give up the actual symptom because pretending to have it is
                                                                     
          enough. You cannot pretend to have a phobia or throw a tantrum and have a real one
          at the same time. The family then readjusts its patterns of interaction without the child
          needing to maintain the symptom. The intervention can turn a deadly serious struggle
          that would not respond to a direct approach at change into a playful make-believe
          game. It is also useful with children because it involves play and pretend.
                                                                     
          Belief System Interventions                                
                                                                     
          Although the focus on structure and patterns emphasizes behavior change first
          with a belief change to follow, the systemic therapists emphasize belief or meaning
          change as the primary target. Three interventions from this approach are reframing
          (Watzlawick et al., 1974), circular questioning (Nelson, Fleuridas, & Rosenthal, 1986;
          Selvini-Palazzoli, Boscolo, Cecchin, & Prata, 1977; Tomm, St. George, Wulff, &
                                                                     
          Strong, 2014), and family rituals (Imber-Black, Roberts, & Whiting, 2003).
            Reframing is an intervention used often by family therapists. The therapist hears the
          situation as presented by the family and then restates it in a new way. The goal is to
          change the way reality is perceived so that new behaviors will follow. For example,
          an anorexic girl who is seen as sick by her parents and in need of a great deal of ten-
          der loving care can be reframed as being disobedient and in a power struggle with her
          parents. A delinquent boy can be viewed alternatively as sad and insecure who is in
                                                                     
          need of firm structure and guidance to feel secure. As with the paradoxical directive,
          these restatements of the problem must be unique to the particular situation and not
          seen as standard and to be used in every case. Positive connotation (Selvini-Palazzoli
          et al., 1977), a form of reframing, always defines symptomatic behavior in terms of its

=== Page 346 (1 cols) ===
332   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      helpfulness to the system. For example, a child’s misbehavior may be redefined as helpful
      to her parent’s communication.                                 
        Circularquestioningisatechniquethathasreceivedalotofattentionintheclinicallit-
      erature. This form of questioning serves as an efficient process for soliciting information
      frommembersofthefamilyregardingtheiropinionandexperienceof(a)thefamily’spre-
      senting concern; (b) in what context the behaviors occur; (c) sequences of interactions,
      usually related to the problem; and (d) differences in family members’ relationships over
      time. All family members are asked questions such as: Who is the most upset when John
      throws a temper tantrum? Who feels the most helpless when it happens? The answers
      are used to generate additional hypotheses about family functioning or additional ques-
      tions. The questions themselves are seen as interventions in that they may provide the
      family with new information about the way things are now and the way they could be
      in the future. New belief systems that necessitate new behaviors by family members can
      be created. Such an approach to opening space for multiple realities is also helpful when
      gay and lesbian teens first come out to their families (Stone-Fish & Harvey, 2005).
        A therapist can prescribe a family ritual (Imber-Black, 2003) that is usually a complex,
      elaborate task involving all family members. The therapist asks the family to complete
      an action or series of actions sometimes accompanied by verbal expressions. The ritual
      is prescribed in every detail: the place it must be carried out, who must say and do what
      action, and the number of times the ritual is to be completed. Often, the instructions
      are given in writing and the session is ended without further discussion about the assign-
      ment. A particular ritual is designed for a family after careful consideration of the unique
      rules that maintain their problems. The ritual breaks these rules in some way and the
      family can experience an alternative belief about themselves.  
        Rituals are different than strategic ordeal interventions because ordeals are usually
      absurdlydetailedhomeenactmentsoftheproblemaimedathelpingfamiliestosubstitute
      healthier interaction patterns in order to replace what the symptom originally provided.
      Rituals, however, are overt and positive reworking of a family’s identity, enhance cohe-
      sion, and facilitate transitions through the life cycle.       
      Solution-Focused Therapy Interventions                         
      Solution-focused and solution-oriented therapies rely on conversations using ordinary
      language. Rather than getting mired in how the problem developed, the conversations
      are directed toward what will be different and better when the problems are solved: The
      therapy is present- and future-focused. Sometimes it is difficult for a family, who may be
                                                                     
      discouraged, to envision a life without its problems. One particular strategy that is used
      by these therapists repeatedly is the miracle question:

=== Page 347 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 333
                                                                     
            Suppose that one night there is a miracle, and while you were sleeping, the
            problem that brought you to therapy is solved. How would you know? What
                                                                     
            would be different? What will you notice different the next morning that will
            tell you that there has been a miracle? What will your spouse notice? (deShazer,
            1991, p. 113)                                            
                                                                     
            With the family’s newly defined, problem-free, and future-describing goals in mind,
          conversationsmayconcentrateonexceptionstotheproblem.Forexample,withafamily
                                                                     
          who has concerns about a child having temper tantrums when being dropped off at
          school, the therapist might ask, “Tell me about a time when she did not have a temper
          tantrum when you dropped her off somewhere,” and go on to explore in great detail
          every aspect of that experience, encouraging members of the family to identify what they
          did to contribute to that success, asking explicitly how each decided to do something
          different.                                                 
            As clients tell their stories, the therapist may highlight and punctuate differences
                                                                     
          or distinctions from the way they handled a similar situation in the past (Dym, 1995).
          When a family seeks help with a child who throws temper tantrums, the therapist may
          hear about some efforts to solve the problem: instead of trying to sneak out of the class-
          room, the parent stayed in the classroom a few minutes; or that instead of the mother
          taking the child to school, the father did. Even if the child still had a temper tantrum,
          the therapist’s interventions would include many observations and questions about the
                                                                     
          attempts at doing something different. If, in fact, these differences did lead to a different
          outcome, clients are encouraged to “do more of the same.”  
            Often when a family is experiencing a problem, family members become so focused
          on that one issue that they neglect areas of the family functioning that are going well.
          One way to move the family away from the negative focus is to ask what is going well:
          what do they want to continue doing or even do more of (de Shazer, 1985)? Another
          technique that inserts some hopefulness is to ask scaling questions; asking clients to rate
                                                                     
          the problem on a scale of 1 to 10. This offers the opportunity to discuss the “degree
          of” the problem rather than a simple “problem/no-problem” dichotomy. The therapist
          can ask questions around these degrees: “Why a 3 and not a 2?” and “What would have
          to happen to make this a 4 or even a 5?” Scaling solutions in increments toward the
          miracle question’s outcome provides families with the opportunity to see incremental
          change and to witness how important it is that everyone contributes to positive change.
            Solution-focused therapy is traditionally brief and ends when the original problem is
                                                                     
          no longer considered a problem, either because the family is doing something different
          or its view of the problem has shifted.

=== Page 348 (1 cols) ===
334   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Narrative Interventions                                        
      One of the primary techniques used in Narrative therapy is externalization of the
      problem as separate from the identified patient. Deconstructing questions help everyone
      in the family trace the effects of the problem on each person and their family as a
      whole. Reconstructing questions enable members to trace the ways they influence the life
      of the problem. Externalization, deconstruction, and reconstruction help all members
      of the family to take responsibility for their own contribution to the problem and for
      their role in positive change. Metaphors are established to guide the family to create
      change, like: “kicking out the chaos,” “creating more cohesion and fun that are toxic
      to the depression,” “learning from the anxiety so as to invite safety,” or “building the
      courage.” Narrative therapy also includes helping families to talk about sociopolitical
      forces that contribute to the problem, such as sexism, racism, heterosexism, or poverty.
      In this way, the family can work together instead of allowing social violence to
      separate them.                                                 
        Narrative therapists often facilitate the change momentum by writing therapeutic
      letterstochildren,teens,andtheirfamiliesbetweensessions.Letterwritingcampaignsin
      which family members write narrative letters to each other, school or medical personnel
      write narrative letters to the clients, or children write narrative letters to themselves
      also work well. In addition, children and their families may see themselves as part of
      a larger community that has dealt with similar problems (such as depression, anxiety,
      incontinence, an eating disorder, a chaotic system, or racism) and receive comfort from
      the normalization of their experience and pride in overcoming the problem.
      New Approaches                                                 
      Directive Family Play Therapy Interventions                    
      Eliana Gil (1991, 1994) and Nancy Boyd-Webb (2007) brought concepts from play ther-
      apyintosystemicfamilytherapypractice.Systemicfamilytherapyideasandmodelshave
      been enriched with concepts from child development, play theory, and trauma theories
      to provide a rich and useful basis from which to help children and their parents under-
      stand and resolve the effects of trauma, major transitions, and childhood worries. In
                                                                     
      directive play therapy the therapist uses puppets, art, clay, dollhouses, toys, and a sand-
      tray to enter into the children’s perspective. Commonly used interventions include the
      family puppet interview in which the therapist asks the family to take 15 minutes to con-
      struct a story with a beginning, a middle, and an end. The family then performs the play
      for the therapist and the therapist enters into the family’s system through the puppet’s
      story. Another method of entering the family system through play is to have the family
      take turns drawing a story. The story can be random or it can be about a particular time
                                                                     
      of day that the therapist would like to know more about: like how does bedtime work,

=== Page 349 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 335
                                                                     
          or what do family dinners look like. (for more details about both of these interventions
          see Gil, 1994).                                            
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Internal Family Systems Therapy Interventions              
          IftheSelfseemstobeconstrainedbyanunbalancedgroupofparts,suchasanoverzealous
          manager or impulsive and destructive firefighter, therapy first focuses on identifying the
          benevolent motivations of the constraining parts. Schwartz and colleagues have devel-
                                                                     
          oped specialized insight oriented and methods of inner work (Schwartz, 1997; Sweezy
          & Ziskind, 2013). Because of the strong influence of systemic thinking and structural
          family therapy on the IFS model, many therapists apply systemic and structural inter-
          ventions (usually direct but occasionally paradoxical strategic) on the internal parts of
          the system to discover the internal dynamics, patterns of interactions, and belief systems
          of this internal system. Narrative- and solution-focused interventions can be used, also.
          The main difference is that unlike some democratic systems, the IFS model is focused
                                                                     
          not only on harmony and balance but on a strong and benevolent Self-leadership of the
          internal system. Once the Self is recognized, the parts are identified, and the internal
          patterns and beliefs are known, the therapist works to help the client to de-constrain
          the Self, return exiled parts into the system, deflate overextended managers, and change
          firefighters into constructive members of the internal system. Several books and journal
          articles are available and training seminars are offered all over the world if a therapist
          wishes to be trained on the model and interventions.       
                                                                     
                                                                     
          IFS Interventions with Children                            
          Children should at least be in concrete operations (Piaget, 1977) because in this stage
          they can first concentrate on more than one thing at a time: a process called decentration
                                                                     
          (Rathus, 2008). Whether in individual or family therapy, using a simplified version of
          IFS and more visual and concrete interventions like puppets, drawing, and sandtray to
          access what different parts might want, do, and feel makes accessing parts easier.
                                                                     
          IFS Interventions with Adolescents                         
                                                                     
          In using IFS therapy with teens, especially those whose cognitive development has
          moved from concrete operations into formal operations (Piaget, 1977), the therapist
          should note that it is common for teens to have several new parts under development.
          Once in the formal operational stage people are capable of deductive reasoning, hypo-
          thetical thinking, and greater empathy for themselves and for others. Therapy using IFS
          can now focus on helping the adolescent to achieve a Self-connection with minimal
          interference and maximum support from all one’s parts. Therapists can help clients to
                                                                     
          identify, understand, know, and have empathy for all of their parts. By working from a

=== Page 350 (1 cols) ===
336   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Self-leadershippositionclientsrebalancetheirinternalsystem.Internalwork(Schwartz,
      1997) through internal and externally lead discussions, journaling, and art-based insight
      therapeutic work are all possible with adolescents alone and with their families.
      Medical Family Therapy Interventions                           
      It is often very difficult when a significant chronic medical condition enters into family
      life. A teenager who is diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes, a child with significant anxiety
      and bladder/bowel problems, a child with asthma, or a 17-year-old boy who is diagnosed
      with cancer several months after his parents were divorced are all examples of the kind of
      disruption caused by dealing with health and the health care system. All of these issues
      also affect the school environment as well. The current focus on “medical home” came
      from attempts to create for families a sense of continuity and clarity in a time of great
      uncertainty and significant time dealing with the health care system.
        The kinds of interventions described in MedFT are as follows:
         Solicit the illness story from all family members. How did it develop? What are the
           greatest fears? Who does it affect the most? The least?   
         Respect the natural defenses of both the patient and the family to deny the problem
           exists and to look only optimistically at the situation. Remove blame and accept
           any kinds of unacceptable feelings that are described by the family.
         Increase “agency” or family member’s ability to make decisions and “go on with life”
           in the face of disability and uncertainty.                
         Keep the illness “in its place,” something to deal with but to not be overwhelmed
           by.                                                       
         Increase the connection between family members about the illness and between the
           family and the medical professionals working with them.   
                                                                     
                                                                     
      GROUP  PROCEDURES  WITH CHILDREN  AND ADOLESCENTS              
                                                                     
      The family is a small group with a shared history. Therefore, family therapy may be
      considered similar to group therapy. However, an additional dimension of family ther-
      apy is multiple families in group programs. Three models of family group facilitation
      are described by Hoopes, Fisher, and Barlow (1984). Family education programs are pri-
      marily instructional in focus, with the expressed intent of imparting information and
      skills to family members. Parent education courses are a common type of family educa-
                                                                     
      tion program. One well-developed parent education program is Bavolek and Comstack’s
      (1985) Nurturing Parent Program. This is a 15-week structured program designed to
      enhance parental self-esteem, parenting skills, social support, and overall healthy family
      functioning.

=== Page 351 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 337
                                                                     
            Family enrichment programs are designed to enhance skills and healthy family inter-
          actions through instructional and experiential activities. Two well-known programs,
                                                                     
          Understanding Us (Carnes, 1981) and Family Cluster (Sawin, 1979), bring groups of
          families together to share experiences, learn new skills, and develop healthier interac-
          tions. Enrichment and education programs provide knowledge and skills in a preventive
          spirit. They assist families in sidestepping or effectively coping with potentially difficult
          situations and, therefore, maintaining family integrity and cohesion.
            Family treatment groups are designed to resolve problems encountered and devel-
          oped by families and, therefore, are remedial in nature. Multiple family group therapy
                                                                     
          involves the treatment of several families together with regularly scheduled sessions.
          A common use of multiple family treatment is in chronic illnesses, addiction recovery
          (e.g., substance abuse), and eating disorders. Steinglass and colleagues have developed a
          comprehensive protocol for running these groups and have conducted research on their
          efficacy (Gonzalez, Steinglass, & Reiss, 1989). Multiple family groups for children with
          asthma or diabetes have also been run where the families can share both struggles and
          strategies that are helpful with each other.               
                                                                     
            In all three models, family members learn from the facilitator(s) and other families.
          All models offer a supportive context for the development of new roles and behaviors.
          In Hoopes et al. (1984), several tested enrichment, education, and treatment programs
          for families with children and adolescents are actually provided.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          CLASSROOM  AND EDUCATIONAL  APPLICATIONS                   
                                                                     
          Systemic theory applies as well to a classroom, a school, or an entire school system as it
          does to a family. Broadening the lens of analysis to include subsystems such as teacher/
          student, student/student, principal/staff, teacher/parents/student can help to provide a
          more organized way of approaching the problem as well as provide more options for
          intervention.Oncethislensiswidened,thechoicesforinterventioncanbeonthestruc-
          ture/organization of the family, the patterns of interaction, the meaning/belief system,
                                                                     
          or possible solutions to the problems.                     
            Children who are exhibiting behavior problems are often afraid of the power these
          symptoms have over adults. They may even escalate the problems to encourage adults
          to take charge. Teachers concerned about this escalation may call the parents in to a
          conference. After these meetings become adversarial, each looks to blame the other for
          the child’s problem. Principals are sometimes present at these meetings, but either they
                                                                     
          are forced to support the teacher’s position or they try to play a mediating role.
            This school-family conference is an excellent example of a technique that focuses
          on the organization or structure of that system. The purpose of these conferences is to
          join with all family members and establish a clear leadership team between the adults.

=== Page 352 (1 cols) ===
338   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Joining involves displaying a keen interest in knowing whether problems seen at school
      are observed in the home context and vice versa. This is done with curiosity about the
      differences between the two settings rather than projection of blame. One of the impor-
      tant benefits of these meetings is that the children are given a clear role to play. This
      depends somewhat on the age of the children, but generally, they are asked to observe
      thediscussionandtoprovideinputinastructuredwaywhenitisrequested.Thechildren
      thus observe the important adults in their life working together. More detailed descrip-
      tions of the possible structure of these interviews can be found in Fine and Holt (1983),
      Molnar and Lindquist (1984), Friedman (1969), or Winslade and Cheshire (1997).
        A classroom can be thought of in much the same way as a family, with the teacher
      playing the same role as a therapist. In most therapeutic approaches, a child’s misbe-
      havior would lead to a focus on the child and an intervention designed to change the
      child’s behavior. A systemic approach would enable the teacher to focus on his or her
      part in maintaining the problem behaviors. Outside consultants such as psychologists,
      social workers, or principals can help teachers to have that perspective and use systemic
      techniques in the problem.                                     
        Interventions can be made by focusing on the patterns of interactions that occur in a
      classroom. When teachers are able to look at their students and classrooms as systems,
      they are able to look at their own beliefs and behavior as part of that system. Instead of
      looking at the sequence of teacher yells and child disrupts or child disrupts and teacher
      yells in a cause-effect manner, both are seen as mutually determining each other. To the
      extent that the teacher yells, the child disrupts. To the extent the child disrupts, the
      teacher yells. This dyadic example could be expanded to include complex interactions
      between groups of students and teachers or administrators.     
        Another example involves a typical sequence at recess where one child is consistently
      being scapegoated into trouble by two other students. The teacher then enforces pun-
      ishment on the scapegoat. If the teachers were to change their part of the pattern by
      intervening in a positive manner with all three students before recess, they might pre-
      vent their negative involvement later. This example enlarges the context to include the
      teachers and would require the teachers to embrace firmly the belief that they help to
      define roles played by the students. This is an alternative to the traditional belief that
      students are totally responsible for their own behavior.       
        Reframing, a technique described earlier, involves a focus on the belief system or
      meaning of the problem, or some aspect of it. Teachers can also use reframing. An angry,
      defiant child can be seen as extremely sad and desperately seeking to provide structure
      in his or her environment. Two children constantly fighting can be seen as attempting
      to work problems out in the only way they know how. Annoying children who are con-
      stantly sharpening their pencil can be seen as anxious to please and perform well on
      schoolwork. Teachers’ responses to a child will depend in large measure on their belief

=== Page 353 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 339
                                                                     
          about the child’s behavior. A teacher who sees a behavior as annoying is likely to become
          easilyirritatedandyellatthechild.Ifthesamebehaviorisseenasthechildbeinganxious
                                                                     
          to please, the teacher may feel more compassion and patience for the child.
                                                                     
          EFFICACY                                                   
                                                                     
          As noted earlier, clinical research was one of the key movements that launched the
          field of family therapy. Since that time, several hundred outcome and process studies
                                                                     
          have been completed on a broad range of family problems, treatment approaches, ther-
          apist factors, and the effectiveness of family therapy. According to Gurman, Kniskern,
          and Pinsof (1986), by the 1980s research had come to occupy a truly significant and
          undoubtedly permanent place in the field of family and marital therapy.
            Family therapy is inherently complex. While seeking to illuminate answers to what
          therapyismosteffectiveforwhatproblems,treatedbywhattherapists,accordingtowhat
          criteria, and in what setting (Paul, 1967, p. 11), perplexing issues of target outcome
                                                                     
          variables, measurement, design, control groups, random selection, subject population,
          integration of research and practice are complicated by a systemic theoretical founda-
          tion. For example, targeted outcome variables may consist of increased healthy family
          functioning, increased individual functioning, and reaching the client’s goal for treat-
          ment. With regard to increased healthy family functioning, how will this be defined,
          by whom, and how will it be measured? If increased individual functioning is the target
          variable, which individual(s) in the family is (are) measured? Regarding studies in which
                                                                     
          client goals are the outcome criteria, what about those families in which the members
          do not agree to a common goal? Despite these and other difficulties, researchers have
          provided studies that conclusively demonstrate the efficacy of family therapy. These
          studies have been notably reviewed by Gurman and Kniskern (1978, 1981), Gurman
          et al. (1986), Todd and Stanton (1983), and Sprenkle (2002, 2012).
            In general, family therapy has been shown to be as effective or more effective than
          individual and other treatment approaches (Shadish & Baldwin, 2003; Sprenkle, 2002).
                                                                     
          Gurman and Kniskern (1978) examined 14 comparative studies (family therapy com-
          pared with other modalities) and found that family therapy was superior in 10 and equal
          in the remaining studies. Family therapy produces beneficial effects in about two thirds
          of cases. In fact, Gurman and Kniskern (1978) estimated the overall improvement rate
          for family therapy cases at 73%. Family therapy can produce positive results in treat-
          ment of short duration (1 to 20 sessions). Short-term or time-limited family therapy
                                                                     
          is as effective as longer-term therapy (Gurman et al., 1986; Todd & Stanton, 1983).
          The involvement of the father in family therapy substantially increases the probability
          of successful outcome (Todd & Stanton, 1983). In a meta-analysis on couple and fam-
          ily therapy interventions, Shadish and Baldwin (2003) found that couples and family

=== Page 354 (1 cols) ===
340   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      therapy approaches have been shown to be effective, and there is little evidence that
      one marriage and family therapy approach is superior to another. Marriage and family
      therapy can also cause deterioration in individuals and relationships. Deterioration rates
      (5% to 10%) for marriage and family therapy are roughly comparable to those reported
      for individual and group therapy. Gurman and Kniskern (1978) isolated certain ther-
      apist behaviors that were related to poor outcomes, including poor relationship skills,
      the confronting of emotionally loaded issues and defenses early in treatment, and little
      structuring of early sessions. More refined therapist skills seem necessary to yield posi-
      tive outcomes. The age/developmental level of the identified parent (child, adolescent,
      adult) is not associated with treatment outcomes (Gurman & Kniskern, 1978).
        With regard to specific disorders of childhood and adolescence, family therapy
      research has focused on psychosomatic disorders, juvenile delinquency and conduct
      disorders, and mixed emotional/behavioral disorders. The majority of the research
      in family therapy has focused on externalized childhood disorders, such as conduct
      disorder and juvenile delinquency, and fewer studies have examined the use of family
      therapy with children experiencing internalized disorders, such as depression and
      anxiety (Northey, Wells, Silverman, & Everett Bailey, 2003; Sprenkle, 2012).
        Structural family therapy has been studied for the treatment of anorexia, diabetes
      mellitus, and chronic asthma. Minuchin, Rosman, and Baker (1978) reported an 86%
      improvement/recovery rate for 53 anorexics and their families. Minuchin et al. (1975)
      reported a 90% improvement rate for diabetes and chronic asthma. All three popula-
      tions were treated with a structural approach. The Maudsley approach (a combination
      of Structural and Strategic family therapy) has been shown to be effective in treating
      adolescent anorexia nervosa (Eisler, Simic, Russell, & Dare, 2007). Brief Strategic Fam-
      ily Therapy, another therapy model blending structural and strategic interventions, was
      developed to treat the needs of Hispanic children in Miami, Florida (Szapocznik, Hervis,
      & Schwartz, 2003). Studies on this approach have demonstrated a reduction in con-
      duct symptoms (Coatsworth, Santisteban, McBride, & Szapocznik, 2001) and greater
      improvement in behavioral problems (Santisteban et al., 2003). 
        Juvenile delinquency and family therapy have been extensively studied at the Uni-
      versity of Utah by James Alexander and associates (Alexander & Parsons, 1973; Klein,
      Alexander, & Parsons, 1977; Parsons & Alexander, 1973) applying functional family
      therapy. Families treated with this approach significantly improved in communication
      and showed a lower rate of recidivism (26%) than other treatment modalities (47%
      for client-centered, 50% for untreated persons, and 73% for dynamic-eclectic therapy
      approaches). Barton, Alexander, Waldron, Turner, and Warburton (1985) extended the
      study to more serious juvenile offenders and found that the use of functional family ther-
      apy resulted in a 57% decrease in criminal activity at a 15-month follow-up. In more

=== Page 355 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 341
                                                                     
          recent studies on the use of functional family therapy, the results have been mixed,
          with no treatment effects shown when treating substance abusing youth (Friedman,
                                                                     
          1989; Waldron, Slesnick, Turner, Brody, & Peterson, 2001). Patterson (1982) studied
          conduct disorders involving aggressive (e.g., physically violent) and nonaggressive (e.g.,
          stealing, lying) behaviors utilizing parent management training. This approach has been
          demonstrated to change child classroom and at-home behaviors.
            Henggeler and Sheidow (2012) studied extensively the use of Multi-Systemic Ther-
          apy (MST) with conduct-disordered youth. They have demonstrated results of reduced
          re-arrests and incarcerations as well as reduced recidivism rates among young sex offend-
                                                                     
          ers. In their review of the use of MST with conduct disordered youth, they found that the
          use of MST has resulted in improved family relations (Hengeller et al., 1986; Henggeler,
          Melton, & Smith, 1992), decreased behavior problems (Borduin et al., 1995; Hengeller
          et al., 1986, 1999; Letourneau et al., 2009; Ogden & Halliday-Boykins, 2004 ), decreased
          emotionalproblems(Hengelleretal.,1986;Ogden&Hagen,2006),improvedpeerrela-
          tions (Borduin, Schaeffer, & Heiblum, 2009; Henggeler et al., 1986; Henggeler et al.,
          1992; Ogden & Halliday-Boykins, 2004), reduced sexual offending (Bourduin et al.,
                                                                     
          2009; Borduin, Henggeler, Blaske, & Stein, 1990; Letourneau et al., 2009), reduced
          recidivism and criminal offending (Borduin et al., 1990; Borduin et al., 1995; Henggeler
          et al., 1992; Henggeler et al., 1999; Henggeler, Melton, Brondino, Scherer, & Hanley,
          1997; Henggeler, Melton, Smith, Schoenwald, & Hanley, 1993; Rowland et al., 2005;
          Schaeffer & Borduin, 2005), and decreased out-of-home placement (Henggeler et al.,
          1992, 1999; Ogden and Halliday-Boykins, 2004; Ogden and Hagen, 2006; Rowland
                                                                     
          et al., 2005; Schoenwald, Ward, Henggeler, & Rowland, 2000; Stambaugh et al., 2007).
          MSThasalsobeenusedto treat adolescentswithpoorlycontrolleddiabetes.Researchers
          have found that the use of MST has led to increased treatment adherence (Ellis et al.,
          2004, 2005a, 2005b, 2007, 2008; Naar-King, Ellis, Idalski, Frey, & Cunningham, 2007),
          and a reduced number of emergency room visits (Ellis et al., 2005b, 2008).
            There has been some research done on the efficacy of Multidimensional Treatment
          Foster Care (Chamberlain, Saldana, Brown, & Leve, 2010), which is used to treat youth
                                                                     
          in need of out of home placement. Randomized Control Trials (RCTs) have demon-
          strated strong treatment results of Multidimensional Treatment Foster Care, including
          decreased criminal charges (Chamberlain & Reid, 1998; Leve, Chamberlain, & Reid,
          2005), fewer days incarcerated (Leve et al., 2005), and decreased externalizing symp-
          toms, depression, and psychiatric distress (Westermark, Hansson, & Olsson, 2011).
            Multidimensional Family Therapy (MDFT) is a combination of family therapy, indi-
          vidual therapy, drug counseling, and multiple systems-oriented intervention approaches
                                                                     
          (Liddle, 2002). In two different RCTs comparing MDFT to empirically supported
          individual approaches, adolescents in the MDFT treatment groups demonstrated a

=== Page 356 (1 cols) ===
342   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      sustained decrease in the involvement in drugs through a 12-month follow-up (Liddle,
      Dakof, Turner, Henderson, & Greenbaum, 2008; Liddle, Rowe, Dakof, Henderson, &
      Greenbaum, 2009).                                              
        The majority of efficacy studies involving childhood depression and anxiety have
      focused on family-based therapy approaches and the results of the studies have demon-
      strated that family-based approaches are comparable to individual approaches, and in
      some cases superior (Northey et al., 2003). In a study done by Diamond, Reis, Diamond,
      Siqueland,andIsaacs(2002),attachment-basedfamilytherapywasshowntobeeffective
      in treating adolescents experiencing major depressive disorder. In an RCT, adolescents
      who completed the 12-week program experienced reduced symptoms of depression and
      anxiety, feelings of hopelessness, and suicidal ideation, as well as a greater improvement
      in mother-adolescent attachment.                               
        Family therapy research has continued into such areas as adult schizophrenia, psy-
      chosomatic symptoms, addictions, depressions, anxiety, couple distress, and sexual dys-
      function. While the field has experienced conceptual and methodological problems, the
      outcome of well-designed studies indicates the effectiveness of family therapy.
      CONCLUSION                                                     
      Family therapy is the clinical application of systems theory in working therapeutically
      with children and adolescents. It has added to the therapist’s options of looking at prob-
      lems and methods of effecting change. The primary orientation is toward evaluating the
      relevant context in which behaviors occur and what factors within that context main-
      tain the presenting problem(s). Interventions are designed to increase family members’
      ability to function in that context. Family therapists are not particularly interested in the
      historical etiology of problems, but rather the factors that allow the problem behaviors
      to continue.                                                   
        Within the field of family therapy, discussion continues about the aspects of family
                                                                     
      functioning that are most salient for therapeutic focus. This chapter described three of
      these in terms of theory, interventions, group procedures, and educational applications.
      Assessment covers structure and organization of family hierarchy and boundaries, pat-
      terns of interaction, and the belief system of individual members or of the family as
      a whole.                                                       
        Thereareseveralnewdirectionsforfamilytherapy.Researchwillcontinuetomeasure
      outcomes and demonstrate the effectiveness of interventions. These studies will need to
                                                                     
      state more specific questions such as which theory/technique is effective with what kinds
      of problems on what kinds of families. Future research studies will include questions such
      as: When should structural interventions be applied? Are tasks given to complete within
      the session more effective than those given outside the session?

=== Page 357 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 343
                                                                     
            While family theorists may argue about the correctness of a given approach, clinical
          practitioners do not seem to be as concerned. In fact, there has been much more of an
                                                                     
          integration of approaches in the past few years. The overview theory described in this
          chapter is an example of this trend. Systems therapists are beginning to apply contextual
          theories in new areas. One example is the training of family medicine physicians. Family
          therapists have begun to work closely with these physicians in cases involving physical,
          behavioral, and emotional difficulties (Doherty & Baird, 1983). Another application
          is in the area of organizational consultation. Schools, businesses, and work teams are
          systems to which these principles have been applied.       
                                                                     
          Case Study                                                 
                                                                     
          Susan, 6 years old, was referred to therapy in the spring of her first grade year because she
          was having significant emotional and behavioral problems. In school, she had trouble
          getting along with her peers, was sometimes outwardly defiant toward her teacher, and
          frequentlyhadtoberedirected.Shecomplainedofstomachachesandwenttotheschool
                                                                     
          nurse several times a week. In addition,Susan had begun having tantrums at home, often
          during times of transition, and particularly when it was time to get ready for school.
                                                                     
          Relevant Background Information/Family History             
          SusanwastheyoungeroftwogirlsborntoCathy,32,andTom,33,whohadbeenmarried
          for 12 years. Tom had been an independent truck driver during their entire marriage,
          and his schedule was often unpredictable, sometimes taking him away for days at a time.
                                                                     
          Cathy had not been employed outside the home since Susan started having health issues
          when she was a year old; prior to that, she had worked part time as a receptionist in an
          insurance company, while her cousin, who lived nearby, provided child care. Susan’s
          older sister, Elaine, 11, was quiet, easygoing, and very helpful. Cathy had had two early
          miscarriagesbetweenElaineandSusan,butherpregnancywithSusanwasrelativelyeasy.
            Susan was described as a colicky baby who was difficult to soothe. She began to expe-
                                                                     
          rience respiratory problems when she was a year old. In the following two years, she had
          been evaluated by a number of medical specialists and she was hospitalized several times.
          Finally a diagnosis of atypical asthma triggered by allergies to dust, cats, and dogs was
          confirmed. Both parents agreed that this was an extremely difficult time for everyone
          as they learned how to modify both their environment and their expectations of Susan.
          Her symptoms were exacerbated when she cried, so they were reluctant to set limits with
          her. They lived in almost constant fear their daughter would stop breathing; even at a
                                                                     
          young age, Elaine was aware of Susan’s symptoms and would often alert her parents that
          she was having trouble breathing. Although Susan had not been sick for several years,
          the parents admitted to a fair degree of watchfulness due to fear of relapse. Cathy felt
          that she worried more than Tom, since he was often not home.

=== Page 358 (1 cols) ===
344   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        Susan had not gone to preschool or kindergarten. Cathy and Tom report that she was
      “moody,” but they had learned how to anticipate her moods, and were able to interrupt
      her temper tantrums by distracting her. Cathy also admitted to giving in to her, as long as
      it was not “too big a deal.” Cathy had been very nervous about sending Susan to school,
      despite Elaine’s success there. Susan often complained that the teacher was “mean” to
      her, and she missed a lot of school. Cathy felt the teacher was only interested in making
      Susan obey and did not understand her sensitive temperament.   
      Assessment                                                     
      There were two relevant interactional systems to consider in understanding what main-
      tained (not what caused) Susan’s problems; the family and school systems. After three
      family interviews, a conversation with Susan’s family physician, and consultation with
      the school, an assessment was made of the (a) structure/organization of these systems,
      (b) patterns of interaction, and (c) the beliefs held about Susan’s problems.
        The family had organized itself around Susan’s challenging temperament and early
      medical issues in a way that may have made sense at the time, but which were no longer
      useful. There were poorly defined boundaries within the family, particularly around
      Cathy and both girls. It was difficult for Cathy to know what level of responsibility
      Susan should be given. To the extent that Cathy did things for her, Susan sensed her
      mother’s concern and acted in ways to justify it. In addition, in Tom’s absence, Cathy
      often relied on Elaine for support, both emotional and concrete help with household
      tasks. Cathy admitted to feeling overwhelmed and exhausted, and somewhat resentful
      that Tom was gone so much of the time. The understandable patterns of protection that
      developed around Susan’s illness were delaying Susan’s emotional growth.
        Susan’s behavior was very disruptive in her first grade class. The teacher shared that
      she wanted children to learn responsibility, and had her classroom set up with learn-
      ing stations with self-directed activities. Susan required more direction than would have
      been expected by a 6-year-old, and the teacher acknowledged that she often heard her-
      self correcting Susan. Susan lacked social skills, and was sometimes destructive to other
      children’s projects and work. “It was like having a 3-year-old in my class,” she said. Susan
      often came home crying about her teacher being “mean.” Cathy called the school to
      complain,andexpressedabeliefthattheteachershouldbemoreunderstandingofSusan.
      Therefore, Susan’s teacher was reluctant to set limits with Susan, so when Susan refused
      to do things the teacher asked or was disruptive, she was removed from the classroom
      and Cathy was called to come get her. On the few occasions when Tom happened to be
                                                                     
      home, he was able to intervene, and instead of bringing Susan home, he set kind but
      firm limits and she was more cooperative at school. Cathy had, on occasion, even called
      Tom to come home early when Susan was having a particularly difficult time. Cathy,
      Susan, and Elaine felt that things were much easier when Tom was home.

=== Page 359 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 345
                                                                     
          Interventions                                              
                                                                     
          Using the assessment data about structure, patterns, and belief systems, the following
          interventions were among those implemented during the course of therapy:
                                                                     
            1. With a release in place, the therapist contacted Susan’s physician, who assured
              the therapist that Susan’s asthma was under good control, although she did
              say that Susan’s allergies needed continued treatment and some monitoring.
              The therapist encouraged the school nurse to contact Susan’s family physician
                                                                     
              so that she was familiar with the treatment plan if Susan did have an asthma
              exacerbation.                                          
            2. The therapist encouraged Tom and Cathy to take Susan to her physician, and
              coached them to ask about how to keep her asthma under good control, and
              whether stress and upset were triggers.                
            3. The therapist facilitated a meeting with Susan’s teacher, guidance counselor,
                                                                     
              school nurse, Tom, and Cathy. The agenda was to repair the misunderstandings
              between the school and the family, and to develop a unified plan for assist-
              ing Susan to succeed at home and school. The school had been unaware of
              Susan’s early medical history, and this was shared. This helped them to under-
              standCathy’s“overprotectiveness.”TheyreassuredCathyandTomthattheyhad
              a plan in place to address potential medical emergencies.
                Susan’s struggles were reframed as her having “missed a step” in her devel-
                                                                     
              opment rather than as evidence of willfulness and destructiveness. The guid-
              ance counselor suggested some strategies for helping Susan to have more success
              socially. Cathy and Tom shared some strategies they used to gain Susan’s coop-
              eration at home, such as giving her a warning prior to transitions. The teacher
              also shared some of her classroom management strategies such as giving children
              responsibility for keeping their things organized and allowing them to participate
              in some of the chores to maintain the classroom, such as wiping tables after snack
                                                                     
              and watering the plants. Cathy and Tom agreed to give Susan more responsibility
              at home.                                               
                It was agreed that Susan be given permission to go to the reading nook in the
              classroom when she felt overwhelmed and needed a break, but that she would no
              longerbeallowedtogohome(unlessreallysick,ofcourse).Susanwasincludedat
              the end of the meeting so that she would see that all the adults were in agreement
              about the plan.                                        
                                                                     
            4. Tom and Cathy agreed to bring their family to family therapy. The focus of
              therapy was to restore more functional boundaries and roles among the family
              members. Through the use of technology, they found ways to help Tom to be
              “present in his absence,” and he became more of a daily presence in the girls’

=== Page 360 (1 cols) ===
346   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
           (and Cathy’s) lives. Cathy no longer felt so alone in the parenting responsibil-
           ities, and she was able to stay steady with the plan. With some of the focus off
           Susan, both Tom and Cathy realized that Elaine was showing some signs of per-
           fectionism and was having stress-related headaches. They “fired” her from taking
           responsibility for some of the household chores and from being the “golden girl.”
      Analysis                                                       
      Thefamily/schoolconferencewasaninterventiondesignedtoestablishaclearhierarchy
      and appropriate boundaries between the adults and children in the system. Susan was
      included in a way that presented the message as clearly as possible. She was put in a
      student/child role and the discussion was in the language of teaching and learning new
      skills rather than control or punishment of past behavior.     
        Reframing was used to present an alternative reality/belief system to all involved.
      Susan was presented as a girl with important developmental tasks to learn rather than
      an emotionally disturbed or “naughty” child. This intervention served to shut the door
      on guilt for the parents and open the door to embrace and practice new, more competent
      behaviors. The structural move to increase Tom’s involvement was designed to give him
      a more responsible role, and give Cathy a break. Tom found out earlier about any prob-
      lemsanddealtwiththemmore effectively.Thisreplacedthemother’s helplessdanceand
      may have helped to break the pattern that maintained Susan’s problematic behavior.
        The focus on Elaine was not used solely to take the spotlight away from Susan
      although that was one benefit. It also provided a different role and alternative belief
      system for Elaine and added a more active nurturing dimension to the relationship
      between her and her parents.                                   
      Results                                                        
      There were dramatic and significant improvements immediately between home and
      school in the areas of collaboration, support, and communication between the adults.
                                                                     
      Susan’s behavior at school also improved. Tom was able to negotiate his work schedule
      a month ahead, which made family events more predictable. He reported being happy
      with being more involved in a school-home program and felt successful. Cathy began
      looking for a part-time job, and reported feeling less stuck and overwhelmed.
                                                                     
                                                                     
      ANNOTATED   BIBLIOGRAPHY                                       
                                                                     
      Boscolo,L.,Cecchin,G.,Hoffman,L.,&Penn,P.(1987).Milansystemicfamilytherapy.NewYork,
        NY: Basic Books.                                             
          The authors are two members of the original Milan team and two American Milan thera-
        pists. In the Introduction, the authors report the evolution of this approach. The remainder
        of the book is dedicated to case studies of family therapy from a Milan perspective.

=== Page 361 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 347
                                                                     
          Goldenberg, I., & Goldenberg, H. (1985). Family therapy: An overview (2nd ed.). Monterey, CA:
            Brooks/Cole.                                             
             This excellent overview for the uninitiated covers family systems and family dysfunction,
            several major theoretical perspectives, techniques of family therapy, and training. It is fre-
                                                                     
            quently used as an introductory text at the master’s level in marriage and family therapy
            courses.                                                 
          Gurman, A. S., & Kniskern, D. P. (1981). Handbook of family therapy. New York, NY: Brunner/
            Mazel.                                                   
             This is considered one of the major texts in family therapy today. Under one cover,
            first-generation theorists (for the most part) in family therapy have written about their the-
            ories in a manner that allows for comparison. Also included are excellent chapters on the
            history of marriage and family therapy and research into this field.
          Haley, J. (1987). Problem-solving therapy (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
             This is the second edition of a classic book in which Haley first coined the term strate-
            gic therapy. It is a clear exposition of the basic tenets underlying Haley’s approach to family
            therapy, a combination of structural and strategic concepts. His chapter on conducting the
            initial interview is particularly good for new therapists who are desirous of a structured way
            to conduct a family interview. His chapter on ethical issues attempts to address charges that
            strategic practices are deceptive or manipulative.       
                                                                     
          Madanes, C. (1984). Behind the one-way mirror. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
             These well-written books have been useful additions to the scope of strategic family ther-
            apy. Madanes emphasizes planning ahead and discovering hidden metaphors in families. The
            majority of case examples in these books involve children and her unique pretend interven-
            tions describe ways for therapists to more gently change patterns in a family.
          Micucci, J. A. (2009). The adolescent in family therapy. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
             Anyone interested in learning systemic family therapy should read this book. It is a clearly
            written text, using mostly structural family therapy. One of its strengths is the plethora of case
            examples. It is written so that both students and experienced clinicians can relate to it and
            glean a deeper understanding of the unique needs of adolescents and their diverse families.
            Its chapters focus assessment and treatment of several of the most common mental health
            issues that adolescents face including: eating disorders, depression, suicide, anxiety, defiance,
            psychosis, and leaving home.                             
          Minuchin, S. (1976). Families and family therapy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
             This seminal text in structural family therapy is an excellent place to begin reading. Min-
                                                                     
            uchin clarified his theory through verbatim therapy transcripts and parallel commentary.
            Particularly helpful in this book is the description of family mapping, an assessment tech-
            nique that allows a therapist to visually place family members or involved systems in space to
            design structural interventions.                         
          Mirkin, M., & Koman, S. (Eds.). (1985). A handbook of adolescents and family therapy. New York,
            NY: Gardner Press.                                       
             The contributions to this handbook cover many topics related to adolescence. The first
            section of the book covers theoretical issues, while authors of the second explore settings in
            which therapy occurs. The last two sections of the book address issues in treatment such as

=== Page 362 (1 cols) ===
348   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        substance abuse and suicide. This book is highly recommended for professionals working with
        adolescents.                                                 
      Papp, P. (1983). The process of change. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
          Peggy Papp, writing from a systemic perspective, provides a very clear approach to treating
        families.Shedescribessystemichypothesizingandinnovativeinterventionsinpracticalterms.
        This is an enjoyable book to read.                           
      Silverstein, O., & Goodrich, T. J. (2003). Feminist family therapy: Empowerment in a social context.
        Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.          
          This is a wonderful introduction to looking at families from multiple feminist perspectives.
        The book begins with an introduction to the feminist critiques of the early family therapy
        models and then proceeds tocover contemporary life-cycle issueslike divorce, gay and lesbian
        families, and parenting adolescents. The next parts of the book examine ethnic identities and
        family, then family power dynamics including power issues around common mental health
        concerns. The book concludes by taking a sociopolitical look at service delivery systems and
        forces that revolve around family issues like family violence.
      Watzlawick, P., Weakland, J., & Fisch, R. (1974). Change. New York, NY: Norton.
          Written by the early pioneers in family therapy and based on the work of Gregory Bateson
        and the Palo Alto project, these are the basic assumptions of one version of strategic brief
        therapy. Innovative interventions are presented that are consistent with these assumptions.
        Descriptionsofhowsolutionscanbecomeproblemsandtheconceptsoffirst-andsecond-order
        change are presented.                                        
      REFERENCES                                                     
      Alexander, J. F., & Parsons, B. (1973). Short term behavioral intervention with delinquent
        families: Impact on family process and recidivism. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 81, 219–
        225.                                                         
      Alexander, J. F., & Parsons, B. (1982). Functional family therapy. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
      Anderson, C. M. (1995). Flying solo. New York, NY: Norton.     
      Barton, C., Alexander, J. F., Waldron, H., Turner, C. W., & Warburton, J. (1985). Generalizing
        treatment effects of functional family therapy: Three replications. American Journal of Family
        Therapy, 13, 16–26.                                          
      Bavolek, S. J., & Comstack, C. (1985). Nurturing program for parents and children: Parents hand-
        book. Eau Claire, WI: Family Development Resources.          
      Bograd, M. (1984). Family systems approaches to wife battering: A feminist critique. American
        Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 54, 558–568.                     
      Bograd, M. (1992). Values in conflict: Challenges to family therapists thinking. Journal of Marital
        and Family Therapy, 18, 245–256.                             
      Borduin, C. M., Henggeler, S. W., Blaske, D. M., Stein, R. (1990). Multisystemic treatment of
        adolescent sexual offenders. International Journal of Offender Therapy and Comparative Crimi-
        nology, 35, 105–114.

=== Page 363 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 349
                                                                     
          Borduin,C.M.,Mann,B.J.,Cone,L.T.,Henggeler,S.W.,Fucci,B.R.,Blaske,D.M.,&Williams,
            R. A. (1995). Multisystemic treatment of serious juvenile offenders: Long-term prevention of
            criminality and violence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 63, 569–578.
          Borduin, C. M., Schaeffer, C. M., & Heiblum, N. (2009). A randomized clinical trial of multi-
                                                                     
            systemic therapy with juvenile sexual offenders: Effects on youth social ecology and criminal
            activity. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77, 26–37.
          Boyd-Webb, N. (Ed.). (2007). Play therapy with children in crisis: Individual, group, and family treat-
            ment (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.            
          Carnes, P. (1981). Understanding us. Minneapolis, MN: Interpersonal Communication Programs.
          Carter, B., & McGoldrick, M. (1988). The changing family life cycle: A framework for family therapy
            (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Gardner Press.                  
          Chamberlain, P., Saldana, L., Brown, H., & Leve, L. D. (2010). Implementation of multidimen-
            sional treatment foster care in California: A randomized control trial of an evidence-based
            practice. In M. Roberts-DeGennaro & S. J. Fogel (Eds.). Empirically supported interventions for
            community and organizational change (pp. 218–234). Chicago, IL: Lyceum.
          Chamberlain, P., & Reid, J. (1998). Comparison of two community alternatives to incarceration
            for chronic juvenile offenders. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 6, 624–633.
          Coatsworth, J. D., Santisteban, D. A., McBride, C. K., & Szapocznik, J. (2001). Brief strategic
            family therapy versus community control: Engagement, retention, and an exploration of the
                                                                     
            moderating role of adolescent symptom severity. Family Process, 40, 313–332.
          de Shazer, S. (1985). Keys to solution in brief therapy. New York, NY: Norton.
          de Shazer, S. (1991). Putting difference to work. New York, NY: Norton.
          Diamond, G. S., Reis, B. F., Diamond, G. M., Siqueland, L., & Isaacs, L. (2002). Attachment-
            based family therapy for depressed adolescents: A treatment development study. Journal of the
            American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 41, 1190–1196.
          Doherty, W. J., & Baird, M. A. (1983). Family therapy and family medicine: Toward the primary care
            of families. New York, NY: Guilford Press.               
          Dym, B. (1995). Readiness and change in couple therapy. New York, NY: Basic Books.
          Eisler, I., Simic, M., Russell, G. F. M., & Dare, C. (2007). A randomised controlled treatment
            trial of two forms of family therapy in adolescent anorexia nervosa: A five-year follow-up.
            Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 48, 552–560. 
          Ellis,D.A.,Naar-King,S.,Frey,M.,Templin,T.,Rowland,M.,&Greger,N.(2004).Useofmul-
            tisystemic therapy to improve regimen adherence among adolescents with type 1 diabetes in
                                                                     
            poor metabolic control: A pilot investigation. Journal of Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings,
            11, 315–324.                                             
          Ellis, D. A., Frey, M. A., Naar-King, S., Templin, T., Cunningham, P., & Cakan, N. (2005a).
            Use of multisystemic therapy to improve regimen adherence among adolescents with type 1
            diabetes in chronic poor metabolic control. Diabetes Care, 28, 1604–1610.
          Ellis, D. A., Frey, M. A., Naar-King, S., Templin, T., Cunningham, P. B., & Cakan, N. (2005b).
            The effects of multisystemic therapy on diabetes stress among adolescents with chronically
            poorly controlled type 1 diabetes: Findings from a randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics, 116,
            826–832.

=== Page 364 (1 cols) ===
350   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Ellis, D., Naar-King, S., Templin, T., Frey, M., Cunningham, P., Sheidow, A.,
                                                    …                
                                                      Idalski, A.    
        (2008).Multisystemictherapyforadolescentswithpoorlycontrolledtype1diabetes:Reduced
        diabetic ketoacidosis admissions and related costs over 24 months. Diabetes Care, 31,
        1746–1747.                                                   
      Ellis, D. A., Yopp, J., Templin, T., Naar-King, S., Frey, M. A., Cunningham, P. B.,
                                                    …                
                                                     Niec, L. N.     
        (2007). Family mediators and moderators of treatment outcomes among youths with poorly
        controlled type 1 diabetes: Results from a randomized controlled trial. Journal of Pediatric Psy-
        chology, 32, 194–205.                                        
      Engel, G. (1980). The clinical application of the biopsychosocial model. American Journal of
        Psychiatry, 137, 535–544.                                    
      Fine, M. E., & Holt, P. (1983). Intervening with school problems: A family systems perspective.
        Psychology in the Schools, 20, 59–66.                        
      Freeman, J., Epston, D., & Lobovitz, D. (1997). Playful approaches to serious problems: Narrative
        therapy with children and their families. New York, NY: Norton.
      Friedman, A. S. (1989). Family therapy vs. parent groups: Effects on adolescent drug abusers.
        American Journal of Family Therapy, 17, 335–347.             
      Friedman,R.(1969).Astructuredfamilyinterviewintheassessmentofschoollearningdisorders.
        Psychology in the Schools, 6, 162–171.                       
      Gehart, D. R. (2009). Mastering competencies in family therapy: A practical approach to theory and
        clinical case documentation. Farmington Hills, MI: Cengage Learning.
      Gil, E. (1991). The healing power of play: Working with abused children. New York, NY: Guilford
        Press.                                                       
      Gil, E. (1994). Play in family therapy. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
      Goldenberg, I., & Goldenberg, H. (1985). Family therapy: An overview (2nd ed.). Monterey, CA:
        Brooks/Cole.                                                 
       Goldner, V. (1985). Feminism and family therapy. Family Process, 24, 31–47.
      Goldner, V. (1991). Feminism and systemic practice: Two critical traditions in transition. Journal
        of Family Therapy, 13, 95–104.                               
      Goldner,V.,Penn,P.,Sheinberg,M.,&Walker,G.(1990).Loveandviolence:Genderparadoxes
        in volatile attachments. Family Process, 29, 343–364.        
       Gonzalez, S., Steinglass, P., & Reiss, D. (1989). Putting the illness in its place: Discussion groups
        for families with chronic medical illness. Family Process, 28, 69–87.
      Gurman, A. S., & Kniskern, D. P. (1978). Research on marital and family therapy: Progress,
        perspective, and prospect. In S. L. Garfield & A. F. Bergin (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy
        and behavior change (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Wiley.          
      Gurman, A. S., & Kniskern, D. P. (1981). Handbook of family therapy. New York, NY: Brunner/
        Mazel.                                                       
      Gurman, A. S., Kniskern, D. P., & Pinsof, W. (1986). Research on the process and outcome of
        marital and family therapy. In S. L. Garfield & A. E. Bergin (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy
        and behavior change (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Wiley.          
      Haley, J. (1980). Leaving home. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.     
      Haley, J. (1987). Problem-solving therapy. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

=== Page 365 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 351
                                                                     
          Hansen, M., & Harway, M. (Eds.). (1993). Battering and family therapy: A feminist perspective.
            Newbury Park, CA: Sage.                                  
          Hare-Mustin, R. T., & Marcek, J. (1988). The meaning of difference: Gender theory, postmod-
            ernism, and psychology. American Psychologist, 43, 455–464.
                                                                     
          Hays, P. A. (1996). Cultural considerations in couples therapy. Women and Therapy, 19(3), 1.
          Henggeler, S. W., Melton, G. B., Brondino, M. J., Scherer, D. G., & Hanley, J. H. (1997). Mul-
            tisystemic therapy with violent and chronic juvenile offenders and their families: The role of
            treatment fidelity in successful dissemination. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 65,
            821–833.                                                 
          Henggeler, S. W., Melton, G. B., & Smith, L. A. (1992). Family preservation using multisys-
            temic therapy: An effective alternative to incarcerating serious juvenile offenders. Journal of
            Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 953–961.         
          Henggeler, S. W., Melton, G. B., Smith, L. A., Schoenwald, S. K., & Hanley, J. H. (1993).
            Family preservation using multisystemic treatment: Long-term follow-up to a clinical trial
            with serious juvenile offenders. Journal of Child and Family Studies, 2, 283–293.
          Henggeler, S. W., Rodick, J. D., Borduin, C. M., Hanson, C. L., Watson, S. M., & Urey, J. R.
            (1986). Multisystemic treatment of juvenile offenders: Effects on adolescent behavior and
            family interactions. Developmental Psychology, 22, 132–141.
          Henggeler, S. W., Rowland, M. R., Randall, J., Ward, D., Pickrel, S. G., Cunningham, P. B., &
                                                                     
            Santos, A. B. (1999). Home-based multisystemic therapy as an alternative to the hospitaliza-
            tion of youth in psychiatric crisis: Clinical outcomes. Journal of the American Academy of Child
            & Adolescent Psychiatry, 38, 1331–1339.3–23.             
          Henggeler, S. W., & Sheidow, A. J. (2012). Empirically supported family-based treatments for
            conduct disorder and delinquency in adolescents. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 38,
            30–58.                                                   
          Hernández, P., & McDowell, T. (2010). Intersectionality, power, and relational safety in context:
            Keyconceptsinclinicalsupervision.TrainingandEducationinProfessionalPsychology,4,29–35.
          Holmes, T., Holmes, L., & Eckstein, S. (2011). Parts work: An illustrated guide to your inner life
            (4th ed.). Kalamazoo, MI: Winged Heart Press.            
          Hoopes, M. H., Fisher, B. L., & Barlow, S. H. (1984). Structured family facilitation programs.
            Rockville, MD: Aspen Systems.                            
          Imber-Black, E. (1988). Rituals in families and family therapy. New York, NY: Norton.
          Imber-Black, E., Roberts, J., & Whiting, R. A. (2003). Rituals in families and family therapy (2
                                                              nd     
            ed.). New York, NY: Norton.                              
          Johnson, L. M., & Schwartz, R. C. (2000). Internal family systems work with children and fami-
            lies. In C. E. Bailey (Ed.), Children in family therapy: Using the family as a resource (pp. 73–111).
            New York, NY: Norton.                                    
          Johnson, S., & Whiffen, V. E. (2003). Attachment processes in couple and family therapy. New York,
            NY: Guilford Press.                                      
          Keeney, B. (2002). Aesthetics of change. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
          Killian, K. (2003). Homogamy outlaws: Interracial couples’ strategic responses to racism and to
            partner differences. Journal of Couple and Relationship Therapy, 2(2/3), 3–21.

=== Page 366 (1 cols) ===
352   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Klein, N. C., Alexander, J. F., & Parsons, B. V. (1977). Impact of family systems intervention on
        recidivism and sibling delinquency: A model of primary prevention and program evaluation.
        Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 45, 469–474.  
      Lacqueur, H. P. (1976). Multiple family therapy. In P. J. Guerin (Ed.), Family therapy: Theory and
        practice. New York, NY: Gardner Press.                       
      Letourneau, E., Henggeler, S., Borduin, C., Schewe, P., McCart, M., Chapman, J., & Saldana, L.
        (2009). Multisystemic therapy for juvenile sexual offenders: 1-year results from a randomized
        effectiveness trial. Journal of Family Psychology, 23, 89–102.
      Leve, L. D., Chamberlain, P., & Reid, J. B. (2005). Intervention outcomes for girls referred
        from juvenile justice: Effects on delinquency. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73,
        1181–1185.                                                   
      Liddle, H. A. (2002). Multidimensional family therapy for adolescent cannabis users, Cannabis
        Youth Treatment (CYT) Series (Vol. 5). Rockville, MD: Center for Substance Abuse Treat-
        ment (CSAT).                                                 
      Liddle, H., Dakof, G., Turner, R., Henderson, C., & Greenbaum, P. (2008). Treating adolescent
        drug abuse: A randomized trial comparing multidimensional family therapy and cognitive
        behavior therapy. Addiction, 103, 1660–1670.                 
      Liddle, H., Rowe, C., Dakof, G., Henderson, C., & Greenbaum, P. (2009). Multidimensional
        Family Therapy for early adolescent substance abusers: Twelve month outcomes of a random-
        ized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77, 12–25.
       Long, J., & Serovich, J. (2003). Incorporating sexual orientation into MFT training programs:
        Infusion and inclusion. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 29, 59–67.
       Mac Kune-Karrer, B., & Weigel Foy, C. (2003). The gender metaframework. In L. B. Silverstein
        & T. J. Goodrich (Eds.), Feminist family therapy: Empowerment in social context (pp. 351–363).
        Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.          
       Madanes, C. (1981). Strategic family therapy. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
       Madanes, C. (1984). Behind the one-way mirror. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
       Marner, T. (2000). Letters to children in family therapy. London, England: Jessica Kingsley.
       McDaniel, S. H., Doherty, W. J., & Hepworth, J. (1992). Medical family therapy and integrated care
        (1st ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
       McDaniel, S. H., Doherty, W. J., & Hepworth, J. (2013). Medical family therapy and integrated care
        (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
       McGoldrick, M., Carter, B., & Garcia-Preto, N. (2010). The expanded family life cycle: Individ-
        ual, family, and social perspectives (4th edition). New York, NY: Pearson.
       McGoldrick, M., & Shibusawa, T. (2012). The family life cycle. In F. Walsh (Ed.), Normal family
        process (4                                                   
             th                                                      
               ed.; 375–398). New York, NY: Guilford.                
      Minuchin, S. (1974). Families and family therapy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
      Minuchin, S., Baker, L., Rosman, B., Liebman, R., Milman, L., & Todd, T. (1975). A conceptual
        model of psychosomatic illness in children. Archives of General Psychiatry, 32, 1031–1038.
      Minuchin, S., & Fishman, H. C. (1981). Techniques of family therapy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
        University Press.

=== Page 367 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 353
                                                                     
          Minuchin, S., Reiter, M., & Borda, C. (2013). The craft of family therapy, challenging certainties.
            New York, NY: Routledge.                                 
          Minuchin, S., Rosman, B., & Baker, L. (1978). Psychosomatic families: Anorexia nervosa in context.
            Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.                 
                                                                     
          Molnar, A. E., & Lindquist, B. (1984). Demons or angels? A lot depends on how you respond to
            misbehavior. Learning, 13(9), 22–26.                     
          Naar-King, S., Ellis, D. A., Idalski, A., Frey, M. A., & Cunningham, P. (2007). Multisystemic
            therapydecreasesparentaloverestimationofadolescentresponsibilityfortype1diabetesman-
            agement in urban youth. Families, Systems, & Health, 25, 178–189.
          Nelson, T. S., Fleuridas, C., & Rosenthal, D. M. (1986). The evolution of circular questions:
            Training family therapists. Journal of Marriage and Family Therapy, 12, 113–127.
          Northey,W.F.,Wells,K.C.,Silverman,W.K.,&EverettBailey,C.(2003).Childhoodemotional
            and behavioral disorders. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 29, 523–545.
          Ogden,T.,&Hagen,K.A.(2006).Multisystemictherapyofseriousbehaviourproblemsinyouth:
            Sustainability of therapy effectiveness two years after intake. Journal of Child and Adolescent
            Mental Health, 11, 142–149.                              
          Ogden, T., & Halliday-Boykins, C. A. (2004). Multisystemic treatment of antisocial adolescents
            in Norway: Replication of clinical outcomes outside of the US. Child & Adolescent Mental
            Health, 9, 77–83.                                        
                                                                     
          O’Hanlon, W. H., & Weiner-Davis, M. (1989).In search of solutions: A new direction in psychother-
            apy. New York, NY: Norton.                               
          Parsons, B. V., & Alexander, J. F. (1973). Short term family intervention: A therapy outcome
            study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 41, 195–201.
          Patterson, G. R. (1982). Coercive family process. Eugene, OR: Castalia Press.
          Paul, G. L. (1967). Outcome research in psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 31,
            109–188.                                                 
          Pearlman, S. F. (1996). Loving across race and class divides: Relational challenges and the inter-
            racial lesbian couple. Women and Therapy, 19(3), 25–35.  
          Piaget, J. (Au.), Gruber, H. E., & Vonèche, J. J. (Ed.). (1977). The essential Piaget: An interpretive
            reference and guide. New York, NY: Basic Books.          
          Pinderhughes, E. B. (2002). African American marriage in the 20th century. Family Process, 41,
            269–282.                                                 
          Prouty,A.M.(2014).Incorporatingfeministpracticeinsupervision.InC.L.Storm&T.C.Todd
                                                                     
            (Eds.), The complete systemic supervisor’s resource guide (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Routledge
            Press.                                                   
          Rathus,S.A.(2008).Childrenandadolescence:Voyagesindevelopment.Belmont,CA:Wadsworth.
          Rowland, M. R., Halliday-Boykins, C. A., Henggeler, S. W., Cunningham, P. B., Lee, T. G.,
            Kruesi, M. J. P., & Shapiro, S. (2005). A randomized trial of multisystemic therapy with
            Hawaii’s Felix Class youths. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 13, 13–23.
          Santisteban, D. A., Coatsworth, J., Perez-Vidal, A., Kurtines, W. M., Schwartz, S. J., LaPerriere,
            A., & Szapocznik, J. (2003). Efficacy of brief strategic family therapy in modifying Hispanic
            adolescent behavior problems and substance use. Journal of Family Psychology, 17, 121–133.

=== Page 368 (1 cols) ===
354   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Sawin, M. (1979). Family enrichment with family clusters. Valley Forge, PA: Judson Press.
      Schaeffer, C. M., & Borduin, C. M. (2005). Long-term follow-up to a randomized clinical trial
        of multisystemic therapy with serious and violent juvenile offenders. Journal of Consulting and
        Clinical Psychology, 73, 445–453.                            
      Schoenwald, S. K., Ward, D. M., Henggeler, S. W., & Rowland, M. D. (2000). MST vs. hospi-
        talization for crisis stabilization of youth: Placement outcomes 4 months post-referral. Mental
        Health Services Research, 2, 3–12.                           
      Schwartz, R. C. (1997). Internal family systems therapy. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
      Selvini Palazzoli, M., Boscolo, L., Cecchin, G., & Prata, G. (1977). Family rituals: A powerful
        tool in family therapy. Family Process, 16, 445–453.         
      Shadish, W. R., & Baldwin, S. A. (2003). Meta-analysis of MFT interventions. Journal of Marital
        and Family Therapy, 29, 547–570.                             
      Silverstein, O., & Goodrich, T. J. (Eds.). (2003). Feminist family therapy: Empowerment in social
        context (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
      Smith, C., & Nylund, D. (1997). Narrative therapies with children and adolescents. New York, NY:
        Guilford.                                                    
      Sprenkle, D. (2002). Effectiveness research in marriage and family therapy. Washington, DC: Amer-
        ican Association for Marriage and Family Therapy.            
      Sprenkle, D. (2012). Intervention research in couple and family therapy: A methodological and
        substantive review and introduction to the special issue. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy,
        38, 3–29.                                                    
      Stambaugh, L. F., Mustillo, S. A., Burns, B. J., Stephens, R. L., Baxter, B., & Edwards, D. (2007).
        Outcomes from wraparound and multisystemic therapy in a center for mental health services
        system-of-care demonstration site. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 15, 143–155.
      Stone-Fish, L., & Harvey, R. G. (2005). Nurturing queer youth: Family therapy transformed. New
        York, NY: Norton.                                            
      Sweezy, M., & Ziskind, E. L. (2013). Internal family systems: New dimensions. New York, NY:
        Routledge.                                                   
      Szapocznik, J., Hervis, O., & Schwartz, S. (2003). Brief strategic family therapy for adolescent drug
        abuse. (NIH Publication No. 03–4751). Bethesda, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
      Tamasese, K. (2003). Gender and culture: Together. In C. Waldegrave, K. Tamasese, F. Tuhaka,
        & W. Campbell (Eds.), Just therapy: A journey (pp. 203–206). Adelaide, Australia: Dulwich
        Centre.                                                      
      Tien, L., & Olson, K. (2003). Confucian past, conflicted present: Working with Asian American
        families. In L. B. Silverstein & T. J. Goodrich (Eds.), Feminist family therapy: Empowerment in
        social context (pp. 135–146). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
      Todd, T. C., & Stanton, M. D. (1983). Research on marital and family therapy: Answers, issues,
        and recommendation for the future. In B. Wolman & G. Stricker (Eds.), Handbook of family
        and marital therapy. New York, NY: Plenum Press.             
      Tomm, K. (1984). One perspective on the Milan systemic approach: Pt. 1. Overview of develop-
        ment, theory, and practice. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 10(2), 113–125.

=== Page 369 (1 cols) ===
Systemic Approaches 355
                                                                     
          Tomm, K., St. George, S., Wulff, D., & Strong, T. (2014). Patterns in interpersonal interactions
            inviting relational understandings for therapeutic change. New York, NY: Routledge.
          Tubbs, C. Y., & Rosenblatt, P. C. (2003). Assessment and intervention with Black-White mul-
            tiracial couples. Journal of Couple and Relationship Therapy, 2(2/3), 115–129.
                                                                     
          Vetere, A., & Dowling, E. (2005). Narrative therapy with children and their families: A practitioners
            guide to concepts and approaches. Oxford, England: Routledge.
          Waldron, H. B., Slesnick, N., Turner, C. W., Brody, J. L., & Peterson, T. R. (2001). Treatment
            outcomes for adolescent substance abuse at 4- and 7-month assessments. Journal of Consulting
            and Clinical Psychology, 69, 802–813.                    
          Walsh, F. (1987). The clinical utility of normal family research. Psychotherapy, 24, 496–593.
          Walsh, F. (Ed.). (2011). Normal family processes: Growing diversity and complexity (4th ed.).
            New York, NY: Guilford Press.                            
          Wark, L., Thomas, M., & Peterson, S. (2001). Internal family systems therapy for children in
            family therapy. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 27, 189–200.
          Waters, D., & Lawrence, E. (1993). Competence, courage, and change. New York, NY: Norton.
          Watzlawick, P., Weakland, J., & Fisch, R. (1974). Principles of problem formation and problem res-
            olution. New York, NY: Norton.                           
          Westermark, P. K., Hansson, K., & Olsson, M. (2011). Multidimensional treatment foster care
                                                                     
            (MTFC): Results from an independent replication. Journal of Family Therapy, 33, 20–41.
          White, M., & Epston, D. (1990). Narrative means to therapeutic ends. New York, NY: Norton.
          Winslade, J., & Cheshire, A. (1997). Narrative therapy in practice: The archeology of hope.
            San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

=== Page 370 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 371 (1 cols) ===
CHAPTER                             
                                  10                                 
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                 Children      and    Adolescents                    
                                                                     
                         with   Disabilities                         
                                                                     
                                                                     
                       Implications for Interventions                
                                                                     
              J                                                      
               ONATHAN                                               
                     M. C                                            
                         AMPBELL                                     
                              , L                                    
                                ISA                                  
                                  A. R                               
                                     UBLE                            
                                        ,                            
                                         AND                         
                                            R                        
                                             ACHEL                   
                                                  K. H               
                                                     AMMOND          
          C                                                          
              ounseling and psychotherapy with children and adolescents with disabilities has
              been shown to be helpful in improving mental health and functional adaptation.
          The purpose of the chapter is to provide an introduction to conducting counseling and
          psychotherapy with individuals with disabilities. The chapter is organized to provide
          general commentary about special considerations when working with children and ado-
          lescents with disabilities; general commentary is followed by discussion of conducting
          psychotherapy with five groups: (1) autism spectrum disorders, (2) learning disabili-
          ties, (3) intellectual disabilities, (4) traumatic brain injury, and (5) physical disabilities.
          Within each group, authors highlight unique considerations for working with children
          and adolescents and emphasize evidence-based therapy findings when applicable.
          GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS                                     
          Although children and adolescents with disabilities vary widely across and within
          diagnostic groups, general heuristics are important to consider when providing psy-
          chotherapeutic services for individuals with disabilities. First, children and adolescents
          with disabilities will likely receive special education services. As such, counseling and
          psychotherapyshouldbecoordinatedwithservicesprovidedwithineducationalsettings.
                                   357

=== Page 372 (1 cols) ===
358   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Second, children and adolescents with disabilities will likely interact with various
      professionals; therefore, counseling and psychotherapy should include consultation
      with other health care and educational providers.              
        Third, counseling and psychotherapy may involve family and caregivers and family
      involvement may take various forms. As discussed within the chapter, parents and
      caregivers experience heightened levels of parenting stress and may benefit from
      parent-directed intervention that focuses on coping. Parents and caregivers may also be
      enlisted to help with the implementation of individual counseling, such as providing
      support and coaching for cognitive techniques to manage distress or pain for children
      with physical disabilities. Parents, caregivers, and siblings may also participate in family
      therapy with individuals with disabilities. Various types of involvement of parents and
      caregivers are illustrated within the chapter.                 
        Lastly, counseling and psychotherapy will likely require modification for use with
      children and adolescents with disabilities. Previous chapters in the text have outlined
      various therapeutic strategies for working with children and adolescents from varied
      frameworks. When providing counseling and psychotherapy for children and adoles-
      cents with disabilities, the psychotherapeutic process will likely require modification
      to benefit the client. Due to various cognitive, motor, language, attention, and adap-
      tive limitations demonstrated by children with disabilities, the delivery of counseling
      and psychotherapy will need to be tailored to match an individual child’s strengths and
      weaknesses. As such, therapy should be informed by input from various stakeholders,
      such as medical professionals, special educators, speech-language therapists, and occupa-
      tional therapists, among others, to develop psychotherapeutic interventions that match
      client abilities. For example, therapeutic modifications may include (a) altering deliv-
      ery of educational materials due to cognitive limitation, (b) reduced length of sessions
      due to fatigue, (c) use of augmentative and adaptive communication devices due to
      speech limitations, and (d) increased frequency of sessions due to memory consolidation
      problems.                                                      
      AUTISM  SPECTRUM DISORDERS                                     
                                                                     
      Effectively meeting the behavioral and mental health needs of children and youth
      with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) requires understanding, flexibility, and creativity.
      Despite the shared characteristics of impaired social communication development
      and repetitive patterns of behaviors and restricted interests, ASD represents one of
                                                                     
      the most heterogeneous DSM disorders. Although the diagnosis of ASD helps inform
      general areas of treatment need, it is insufficient for setting individualized therapeutic
      goals and selecting specific treatment approaches. Today, practitioners have several
      examples of empirically supported, behavior-based interventions and a growing number

=== Page 373 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 359
                                                                     
          incorporating cognitive-behavioral components to guide treatment (e.g., Chalfant,
          Rapee & Carroll, 2007; Harris & Delmolino, 2002); but the heterogeneity in ASD
                                                                     
          makes no single protocol effective for every individual. Instead, to be able to determine
          what works best for a specific child, the clinician must have a solid understanding of
          the impact of ASD on behavior and learning, the ability to interpret behavior from
          the child’s viewpoint, the flexibility to apply trial-and-error, and originality to develop
          treatment materials. Because children start at different baseline levels of skill, have
          different treatment goals, and have individualized treatment plans, an idiographic
          outcome-based approach such as goal attainment scaling is necessary for measuring
                                                                     
          treatment success (Ruble, McGrew, & Toland, 2012). In this section, we describe
          both the differences within social communication skills and repetitive patterns of
          behaviors and interests and the common learning styles of individuals with ASD.
          Understanding the shared ways individuals with ASD experience the world helps
          the clinician appreciate the culture of autism (Mesibov, Shea, & Schopler, 2005);
          moreover, the clinician who is able to apply a conceptually sound approach for adapting
          interventions will have more success compared to a clinician who works within an
                                                                     
          atheoretical model (Mesibov et al., 2005; Ruble & Mathai, 2010). We then provide
          descriptions of empirically supported strategies that can be embedded within treatment
          plans to facilitate the therapeutic process. We conclude with special consideration for
          parents and families.                                      
                                                                     
          Special Issues and Social-Emotional Concerns               
                                                                     
          The heterogeneity of expressed behaviors illustrates the scope and range of characteris-
          tics associated with autism and reinforces its designation as a “spectrum disorder.” Of
          the core impairments, social communication skills can range from aloof, passive, or
          active but odd (Wing, 1997); atypical social emotional cognitive understanding also
          varies (Celani, Battachi, & Arcidiacono, 1999), such as abilities to interpret and express
          nonverbal and verbal social communication, even for those with extensive verbal skills
          (Johnson & Myers, 2007). Restricted and repetitive patterns of behavior or interests may
                                                                     
          include recurrent motor movements such as body rocking and hand flapping, complex
          compulsive behaviors or preoccupations with specific cognitive themes, as well as resis-
          tance to changes in routines (Leekam et al., 2007; Mink, Mandelbaum, Tuchman, &
          Rapin, 2006). Although not considered a core feature, intellectual abilities vary and as
          many as 40% of children have intellectual disability in addition to ASD (Centers for
          Disease Control and Prevention, 2012).                     
                                                                     
          Cognitive Theories                                         
                                                                     
          Three cognitive theories offer important information for appreciating the unique ways of
          understanding in children and youth with ASD: (1) theory of mind (TOM), (2) central

=== Page 374 (1 cols) ===
360   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      coherence(CC),and(3)executivefunction(EF;Volkmar,Lord,Bailey,Schultz,&Klin,
      2004). Each theory is important to understand because of the links that can be made
      to effective interventions. The first, TOM, is the ability to understand and attribute
      meaning of mental states (Baron-Cohen, Tager-Flusberg, & Cohen, 2000). Difficulty
      understanding the source of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors of self and others creates
      challenges in social problem solving and social interactions. For example, a child who
      talks incessantly about pro wrestling will not appreciate that others may not share the
      same interestandbeconfusedwhenclassmatesbecomeavoidant.Thesecond,CC,refers
      to the tendency to focus on details rather than the overall meaning or global whole
      (Frith & Happe, 1994). CC may help explain problems individuals with ASD have in
      generalizing information from one situation to another (Plaisted, 2001). For example,
      a youth with ASD learns the school rules and follows them faithfully but may become
      upset when classmates break the rules. Not being able to take into account the social
      context, the youth reports the rule breakers openly during class to teachers unaware of
      the negative impact this will have on future relationships with peers. The last theory, EF,
      is a general term that refers to the abilities to initiate, sustain, shift, and inhibit behavior
      (Denckla, 1996). EF problems can be attributed to difficulties taking in multiple types
      of information, making decisions quickly based on this information, and evaluating the
      outcomes of the situation. For example, a child with ASD who blurts out answers in class
      even after the teacher ignores the remarks is having difficulty identifying the problem
      and generating solutions.                                      
      Comorbid Issues                                                
      Treatment goals will often need to address comorbid psychiatric disorders that may
      include depression, anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder, and bipolar disorder (Kim,
      Szatmari, Bryson, Streiner, & Wilson, 2000; Tantam, 1991). Anxiety and depression
      are reported as the most frequently occurring secondary conditions (Hammond &
      Hoffman, 2014). Research suggests that the percentage of youth with comorbid anxiety
      may range from 39% to 56%, and depression may range from 10% to 44% (Mattila
      et al., 2010; Mazefsky, Conner, & Oswald, 2010). Thus, it is essential that clinicians be
      able to address the emotional issues often associated with ASD.
        Maladaptive behaviors may also be a concern. Although not part of the diagnostic
      criteria for ASD, maladaptive behaviors may be associated with the underlying impair-
                                                                     
      ments of social communication, and restricted or repetitive behaviors (Dominick,
      Davis, Lainhart, Tager-Flusberg, & Folstein, 2007). Problematic behaviors serve
      various functions such as asserting control over one’s environment (Howlin, 1998)
      or communicating pain, dislike, frustrations, and refusals. To address such issues, a
      functional behavioral assessment (FBA) that includes positive behavior supports is

=== Page 375 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 361
                                                                     
          necessary (Nounopolous, Mathai, & Ruble, 2009). FBA is used to understand the
          purpose of a behavior, which, in turn, guides intervention (Cooper, Heron, & Heward,
                                                                     
          2007). Several meta-analytic studies have substantiated the efficacy of FBA in reducing
          problem behaviors for individuals with ASD (e.g., Campbell, 2003).
                                                                     
          Therapeutic Approaches                                     
                                                                     
          Selecting goals for treatment is best done using a multimethod, multisource approach,
          including parent and teacher interviews and direct child assessment. Treatment assess-
          ments may focus on the core social communication impairments associated with ASD,
          such as social skills (Stone et al., 2010) or comorbid issues of anxiety, depression, or
          maladaptive behaviors. For preschool and young children, effective early intervention
          programs typically target core symptoms, are theory-driven, involve 20 hours or more of
                                                                     
          intervention, and a program for transitions (see Lord & McGee, 2001). For older chil-
          drenandyouth,treatmentplansmayalsoincludeissuesassociatedwithanxiety,mood,or
          behavior disorders. A functional behavioral assessment approach should be considered
          within all treatment planning, including internalizing disorders so that the communica-
          tive function of underlying problematic behaviors is identified (Lang, Mahoney, Zein,
          Delaune, & Amidon, 2011).                                  
            After careful assessment of needs from multiple sources, successful implementation of
                                                                     
          a treatment plan involves structuring the therapeutic relationship. For those with ASD,
          this requires a more directive approach (Anderson & Morris, 2006) whereby expecta-
          tions of the therapy process and goals are clearly established with the parent and child,
          when possible. Often, children and youth with ASD have significant organizational
          problems and difficulties following through with assignments or homework. A lack of
          complianceisnotnecessarilyassociatedwithresistance.Explicitexamplesandassistance
          with scheduling is necessary and often teaching problem solving can be used to identify
                                                                     
          solutions to disorganization. For example, handouts can be used to visually guide the
          process of social problem solving (e.g., Bloomquist, 2005). Active and attentive engage-
          ment during the session is facilitated by visual schedules and self-monitoring/regulation
          strategies (Laurent & Rubin, 2004). A goal is established at the beginning of the ses-
          sion and, if needed, a reward is also identified for goal accomplishment (e.g., answering
          questions; completing homework). Due to the difficulty individuals with ASD have with
          generating solutions to problems, they often have difficulty conceptualizing the bene-
                                                                     
          fit of therapy across many areas (e.g., building relationships, dealing with frustration).
          Identifying the connections between therapy goals and long-term outcomes is necessary.
          For example, for an adolescent who is not completing school work, explicit discussion
          of the importance that homework has on grades, graduation, and a future goal of being
          a computer programmer can be helpful.

=== Page 376 (1 cols) ===
362   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Treatment of Core Symptoms                                     
      After treatment evaluation and goal selection, it is necessary to establish specific
      strategies designed for increasing social cognitive understanding, prosocial behaviors,
      and other skills identified by the assessment. Due to combined effects of disordered
      development of TOM, EF, and WCC, therapeutic techniques must be adapted, indi-
      vidualized, and tailored to each individual with ASD (Elder, Caterino, Chao, Shaknai,
      & DeSimone, 2006). Research has shown that cognitive behavioral treatment can
      be specifically tailored to include skills training and social coaching for individuals
      with ASD (Lang et al., 2011). The promotion of skills teaching and incorporation of
      cognitive-based strategies allows for not only the development of new skills but also
      an understanding of the importance of specific skills. Described next is a four-step
      procedure for direct instruction. Examples of evidence-based strategies of visual
      supports, social stories, video self-modeling, self-management, and relaxation training
      are provided.                                                  
        In our work, we have found that treatment plans that include a general four-step
      procedure are effective. The steps include: (1) introducing the skill and describing why
      it is important; (2) showing what the skill looks like; (3) role-playing the skill; and
      (4) practicing the skill at home (Ruble, Willis, & Crabtree, 2008). A Social Story™
      (Gray, 2000) is used to introduce the importance of the skill from another’s perspective.
      Social Stories™ provide written information that describes situations, others’ perspec-
      tives about the situation, skills, and responses. Next, a sorting activity that breaks down
      the skill into its component parts (i.e., a task analysis) or depicts the correct vs. incor-
      rect way to perform the skill is implemented; the use of picture cards (e.g., pictures
      from magazines, hand drawings on 3                             
                              ×                                      
                               5 cards) helps individuals develop a concrete
      depiction of the positive skill being taught (Baker, 2001). Third, role-plays and feed-
      back are standard techniques (Barnhill, Cook, Tebbenkamp, & Myles, 2002) for the
      specificskilland,whenpossible,basedonissuesdescribedbytheindividualorbyparents.
      Fourth, because of the difficulty generalizing information from a clinical context to
      home, school, and community settings, treatment plans should include activities that
      address problems with generalization (Elder et al., 2006; Reaven & Hepburn, 2003)
      such as homework. If parents, caregivers, or significant others are not part of the treat-
      ment session, either through observation or as part of family therapy, it is necessary
      that as much information as possible be shared with them, including extra materials for
      home use.                                                      
        In each of the four steps, visual supports—a common element of effective
      interventions—are incorporated. Visually depicted information allows for in-depth
      definitions or task analysis of skills (e.g., drawings to depict social situations) that
      enhance concept learning of abstract concepts. Visual cuing also serves as a prompt to

=== Page 377 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 363
                                                                     
          help the person organize thoughts and initiate interactions. Social stories and comic
          strip conversations (Gray, 2000) are strategies used to help explain perspectives of self
                                                                     
          and others. Cognitive scripts assist in teaching the person to initiate and maintain
          conversations independently while video self-modeling (Buggey, 2005) teaches positive
          behaviors and reduces unwanted behaviors by allowing persons to view themselves
          in situations where they are performing at a more advanced level than they typically
          function. Power cards (Keeling, Myles, Gagnon, & Simpson, 2003) incorporate special
          interests of the person with ASD as part of the teaching and reinforcement of academic,
          behavior, and social skills. The common element of all these strategies is that they take
                                                                     
          into account the need for concrete information that is not abstract and is based on
          visual learning.                                           
            Other therapeutic goals often embedded within therapy sessions are self-management
          and relaxation training. Self-management procedures are behavioral techniques that
          require individuals to actively monitor their own actions and appropriately provide
          reinforcement in response to these behaviors (Bregman et al., 2005). Koegel, Frea,
                                                                     
          Surratt, Schopler, and Mesibov (1994) suggested that by teaching individuals with
          ASD how to self-monitor, new complex skills are developed that serve to decrease
          problematic behavior. Self-management techniques have been shown to reduce a
          variety of maladaptive behaviors such as tantrums, aggression, and vocal outbursts
          (Krantz, MacDuff & McClannahan, 1993; Mancina, Tankersley, Kamps, Kravits, &
          Parrett, 2000).                                            
            Relaxation training and cognitive picture rehearsal are other methods for reducing
                                                                     
          negative behaviors. Progressive relaxation procedures that include systematic tightening
          and relaxing of muscles and breathing techniques have received some support in the
          literature to reduce problematic behavior (Mullins & Christian, 2001). Cognitive
          picture rehearsal is a technique that has shown promise in reducing maladaptive behav-
          iors among low-functioning individuals with autism (Groden & LeVasseur, 1995).
          The picture rehearsal approach utilizes drawings and/or pictures with short narratives
          in sequence to address a specific concern displayed by an individual. The sequence
                                                                     
          typically involves the antecedents to a problem situation, the desired or expected
          behavior, a coping technique, and a potential reinforcer (Baker, 2001).
            Withtheadditionofthesecomponentsandtheemphasisonbuildingproblem-solving
          skills, the reduction of undesired and promotion of preferred behavior can be directly
          addressed. Nevertheless, although a plethora of research exists on behavior manage-
          ment among individuals with ASD, “no single intervention has been shown to deal
                                                                     
          effectively with problem behaviors for all children with autism” (Lord & McGee,
          2001, p. 118). Further, interventions that fail to recognize significant challenges such
          as anxiety disorders, a common comorbidity among individuals with ASD (Kim et al.,
          2000), may overlook an essential piece to positive long-term posttreatment outcomes.

=== Page 378 (1 cols) ===
364   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Therefore, emphasis should be placed on the individualization of treatment and the
      involvement of cognitive strategies.                           
      Treatment of Anxiety and Mood Disorders                        
      Treatment research shows that individuals with ASD can benefit from psychosocial
      interventions, such as cognitive behavioral strategies, to ameliorate anxiety, depres-
      sion, self-injurious behavior, and obsessive compulsive disorder (Anderson & Morris,
      2006; Attwood, 2007; Reaven & Hepburn, 2003; Sofronoff, Attwood, & Hinton, 2005).
      The diagnosis of ASD cannot be ignored as part of treatment, however, as research
      also suggests that problems of anxiety or depression may be influenced by the social
      perceptions and behaviors of individuals with ASD (Meyer, Mundy, Van Hecke, &
      Durocher, 2006). Another unique aspect that must be emphasized when applying cog-
      nitive behavior therapy to individuals with ASD is that more time often needs to be
      spent on emotion education and learning the relationships between emotions, thoughts,
      and behaviors. Although not specific to ASD, Bloomquist (2005) has several visually
      aided resources on emotion education and helpful and unhelpful thoughts. Anderson
      and Morris (2006) provide a detailed overview of the strategies to adapt the components
      of cognitive behavioral therapy for individuals with ASD. Modifications include use of
      visually based systems for establishing baseline symptoms and goal monitoring, such as
      utilizing a visual “emotion thermometer.”                      
      Family and Parent Issues                                       
      Many families deal with issues that are common to families with a child with a chronic
      medicalorpsychiatricdisorder,butresearchsuggeststhattheexperiencesarenotentirely
      similar. Parents of children with ASD report greater stress compared to parents of chil-
      dren with other special health care needs (Estes et al., 2013). Issues may involve sadness
      and grief, fatigue and lack of patience, guilt, confusion understanding the symptoms,
      sibling embarrassment, acceptance of ASD, and problems accessing services (Ruble,
                                                                     
      Mathai, Tanguay, & Josephson, 2008). Stress is especially pronounced for caregivers of
      children with problem behavior (Estes et al., 2013).           
        Family and parent issues may be addressed through family interventions that include
      psychoeducation and behavior management training (Estes et al., 2013), as well
      as home services and the integration of family therapy with psychotherapy (Ruble
      & McGrew, 2007). The psychoeducational model is the most common model of
      family intervention in ASD. In this model, parents are supported in dealing with the
                                                                     
      disorder and given information on treatment options. Stress in the family is often a
      response to managing difficult symptoms. Yet, a careful family evaluation may identify
      issues of family distress and functioning that leads to a worsening of child symptoms.
      Further assessment should include parents’ knowledge of developmental norms,

=== Page 379 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 365
                                                                     
          parental alliance and support, success outside the parenting world, and stability of the
          other children.                                            
                                                                     
                                                                     
          INTELLECTUAL  DISABILITY                                   
                                                                     
          Children and adolescents with intellectual disabilities (ID) encompass a heterogeneous
          groupofindividualswithvariousetiologiesandcourses.TheAmericanPsychiatricAsso-
          ciation (APA, 2013) recently noted that intellectual disabilities impact about 1% of the
          population; males are more commonly diagnosed with both mild and severe ID (1.6 to 1;
                                                                     
          1.2to1,respectively).Inmanyways,therehasbeenanincreaseingeneralunderstanding
          about ID among practitioners and to some extent among laypersons, and comprehensive
          services in the schools and community are more common. Further, there has also been
          an important change in the nomenclature, where the terminology has shifted to a per-
          son first language (i.e., children with ID) and from the antiquated term mental retardation
          (MR) to ID. For the purposes of this chapter, prior literature using the outdated term of
          MR will be replaced with the more appropriate usage of ID. 
                                                                     
          Identification                                             
                                                                     
          Clinicians benefit from having a good basic knowledge and understanding of general
          assessment practices and diagnosis for ID. The recently revised Diagnostic and Statistical
          Manual, fifth edition (DSM-5; APA, 2013), provides guidelines for identifica-
          tion of ID including: (a) deficits in intellectual functions, (b) deficits in adaptive
                                                                     
          functioning                                                
                 …                                                   
                   [that] limit functioning in one or more activities of daily life, (c) onset of
          deficits during the developmental period (p. 33). An additional aspect of the diagnosis
          that facilitates better programming for individuals with ID are specifiers of severity
          (i.e., mild, moderate, and severe); these specifiers are based on adaptive functioning
          and level of support required for the individual.          
            In order for children and adolescents to receive school-based services, they must qual-
          ify under the Individual Disabilities Education Act (IDEA; U.S. Department of Educa-
          tion, 2004). Every state interprets the federal law into their respective criteria of ID, yet
          the general description from the regulations details the following: (a) significantly sub-
          average general intellectual functioning, (b) deficits in adaptive behavior, (c) manifests
          during the developmental period, and (d) adverse effects on educational performance
          (U.S. Department of Education, 2004). Many states provide a similar specifier or gen-
          eral level of functioning, for example Mild Mental Disability and Functional Mental
          Disability (Kentucky Department of Education, 2008); the distinction is determined by
          cognitive and adaptive scores and can subsequently be used to determine instructional
          supports and personnel. Regardless, individual characteristics of the student with an ID
          should help guide the planning committee on teaching methods.

=== Page 380 (1 cols) ===
366   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Special Issues and Social-Emotional Concerns                   
      In addition to the need for direct instruction in the areas of academics and adaptive
      functioning, general well-being of children and adolescents with ID should be consid-
      ered. Positive mental health allows individuals to perform at their individual best; thus,
      clinicians should be cognizant of potential comorbid psychopathology. Reports of such
      comorbidity have greatly varied within this population. In a review of nine published
      studies, comorbid conditions in ID were estimated to occur in 30% to 50% of children
      and adolescents with ID (Einfeld, Ellis, & Emerson, 2011). Various methodological and
      sampling differences were cited by Einfeld et al. (2011) to account for differences that
      existed. The rates of externalizing disorders and internalizing disorders were fairly simi-
      lar in a recent review by Dekker and Koot (2003), with disruptive disorders reported at
      a rate of 25.1% and mood/anxiety disorders reported at 26.3%. In sum, the presence of
      comorbid conditions indicates the need for individualized treatment.
        Additionally, risk factors in development of psychopathology warrant examination.
      Koskentausta,Iivanainen,andAlmgvist(2007)indicatedthereareconflictingreportsin
      the ID population, for example, if more impaired level of cognition relates to more risk of
      psychiatric conditions. However, Koskentausta et al. (2007) found the risk of developing
      psychopathology is increased under the following conditions: (a) moderate (rather than
      severe) ID, (b) limitations in adaptive behavior, (c) poor socialization, (d) living with
      one biological parent, and (e) low socioeconomic status. Several of these risk factors are
      congruent to those found in typical populations. Einfeld and Emerson (2008) reported
      that individuals with mild ID engaged in more antisocial or disruptive behaviors, while
      those individuals with moderate or severe behaviors experienced more problems with
      social relations. Similar to non-ID populations, clinicians benefit from knowledge of
      risk factors for developing psychopathology in individuals with ID.
        Given language, cognitive, and social characteristics, clinicians should inquire about
      assessmentofcomorbidconditionsforID.TheAmericanAcademyofChildandAdoles-
      centPsychiatry(AACAP,1999)reportedthatassessmentofcomorbidconditionsshould
      involve the same approach as for other individuals, with some slight modification due
      to cognitive and communication deficits. For example, a depression self-report scale,
      such as the Reynolds Adolescent Depression Scale, second edition (RADS-2; Reynolds,
      2002), could be a tool used by the clinician; however, the adolescent with ID might need
      to be interviewed regarding endorsed items to ensure they understood the terminology
      and phrasing. Further, a child with ID might not have the introspection or expressive
      skills to articulate specific feelings of anxiety or depression. Therefore, multi-method,
                                                                     
      multisource, and individualized approaches are recommended for a better understand-
      ing of previous and current functioning to determine presence of comorbid, especially
      internalizing, conditions. Although not a focus of the chapter, accurate assessment of

=== Page 381 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 367
                                                                     
          potential comorbid conditions is recommended for adequate treatment planning and
          support systems.                                           
                                                                     
          Therapeutic Approaches                                     
                                                                     
          Given the manifestation of comorbid conditions, it is relevant for clinicians to have a
          thorough understanding of available and appropriate therapies for individuals with ID.
          As with assessment processes, the AACAP (1999) recommended that treatment princi-
          ples for individuals with ID should be the same as for other individuals receiving therapy,
                                                                     
          with some modifications provided based on individual characteristics and communica-
          tion. However, modifications to psychotherapy processes or manualized treatments may
          create problems with fidelity of these interventions.      
            Furthermore, from a more practical standpoint, clinicians might be uncomfortable
          in working with individuals with disabilities from a therapeutic standpoint, especially
          a group as heterogeneous as ID. The thought might also exist that these individuals
          are so distinct from typical individuals that services could not be implemented effec-
                                                                     
          tively. Limited knowledge or comfort levels should not prevent individuals with ID from
          receiving psychotherapy or other appropriate services, or that common best practices are
          negated because of the identified population (e.g., not coordinating treatment plans).
          McCarthy and Boyd (2002) reported that many individuals with ID in the United King-
          dom become caught between service providers, thus not receiving congruent service
          delivery. Moreover, the application of treatment approaches might seem irrelevant to
          clinicians if the child has an ID, as clinicians may interpret ID as the root of the prob-
                                                                     
          lem and believe that no additional supports are warranted. Einfeld and Emerson (2008)
          stated that “mental health professionals have tended to view emotional and behavioral
          disturbances in the presence of ID as a ‘behavioral’ manifestation rather than mani-
          festation of ID. At the same time, disability advocates have been keen to distance ID
          from the perceived stigma and overly medicalized concept of mental illness.” (p. 828).
          Both of these factors affect how children and adolescents are serviced in schools and in
                                                                     
          the community.                                             
            Matson, Terlonge, and Minshawi (2008) indicated that the bulk of intervention
          literature for ID has been conducted on amelioration of challenging behaviors, non-
          compliance, and somewhat on social skills. This also brings to light a relevant aspect of
          this discussion; how psychotherapy is defined for this population. Prout and Browning
          (2011) noted in their review of the literature that the Meltzoff and Kornreich (1970)
          definition has been used by many researchers and includes the utilization of face-to-face
                                                                     
          implementation of psychological principles with the intent to modify part of feelings,
          behaviors, values, or attitudes through the intervention. Thus, behavior modification
          techniques and more skill-based treatments such as shaping and task analysis may be
          included in the definition of psychotherapy.

=== Page 382 (1 cols) ===
368   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
        In their synthesis, Prout and Browning (2011) reported that psychotherapy, broadly
      defined as above, is thought to be generally effective for individuals with ID. However,
      there were several issues with the existing literature that needed to be addressed. Prout
      and Browning (2011) noted the following: (a) a paucity of randomized control trials
      exist, (b) there is an increased need for manualized treatments, and (c) adaptations made
      to interventions need to be more clear and defined. Finally, research in the area of psy-
      chotherapy with ID has focused on adults; there is a need for more focused research with
      children and adolescents. While we await additional research, the following provides a
      summary of some treatments that have been found useful.        
      Parent Training                                                
      For younger children and those individuals with more severe ID, parent training has
      been shown to provide additional support for the child and family. Bagner and Eyberg
      (2007) studied the utilization of Parent-Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) with young
      children (ages 3 to 6) having ID and comorbid oppositional defiant disorder (ODD)
      diagnoses. PCIT has been reported to be an efficacious training program for parents of
      children with severe behaviors. Bagner and Eyberg (2007) examined the use of PCIT,
      without modification to the program, via RCT. Results revealed initial support of PCIT
      with young children having ID and comorbid ODD, with disruptive behaviors decreased
      and mothers experiencing more positive interactions with their children. Due to the
      aforementioned issues of limited RCT in this population, along with the questions of
      adaptations and modifications, the Bagner and Eyberg (2007) research shows initial
      promise for parents and their ability to facilitate behavioral changes for their young
      children with ID.                                              
      Cognitive-Behavior Therapy                                     
      Cognitive-behavior therapy has been reported as an effective treatment for a wide range
      of individuals (Bruce, Collins, Langdon, Powlitch, & Reynolds, 2010), yet it has been
      debated in the literature as a treatment for individuals with ID due to concerns regarding
                                                                     
      the cognitive aspects of therapy (e.g., Hurley, 2005; King, 2005; Sturmey, 2005). One
      reasonforthequestionisthelimitedscientificevidenceonthebenefitofsuchtreatment;
      this continues to be the case in children and adolescents with ID. Yet, Bruce et al. (2011)
      conducted a RCT for adults with ID, specifically examining how the participants were
      able in a single training session to link thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Bruce et al.
      (2010) found that individuals with ID successfully participated in cognitive mediation,
                                                                     
      or linking feelings to thoughts, a skill considered a prerequisite to successful CBT. How-
      ever, in the first training session, the adults were unable to make the connection with
      their behaviors (Bruce et al., 2011). Clearly more research is needed on the use of CBT
      with a younger population. Regardless, King (2005) noted “practice-based evidence does

=== Page 383 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 369
                                                                     
          suggest that psychotherapeutic support                     
                                  …                                  
                                    can be life enhancing.” (p. 449), and given
          CBT’s strong support for internalizing symptoms in particular, it should be considered
          for those with ID.                                         
          Behavioral Interventions                                   
          Behavioral interventions drew much attention and subsequent debate following
          Sturmey’s (2005) conclusions that behavioral interventions were superior to other
          psychotherapeutic approaches for individuals with ID, regardless of the clinical con-
          cern. Hurley (2005) responded that both behavioral interventions and psychotherapy
                                                                     
          require further study for use with individuals with ID. Regardless, as a clinician, a
          main goal is to prioritize and effectively treat individuals based on their symptoms.
          It would appear that the assessment process would ultimately guide clinicians in
          selecting relevant treatment rather than selecting a treatment prior to working with the
          individual.                                                
            As noted by Matson et al. (2008), behavior interventions have been a major focus
                                                                     
          in the comorbidity research on ID. However, given the intensity and potential for harm
          that some disruptive behaviors contain, it is helpful for clinicians to have knowledge
          of types of interventions that have been utilized. Feldman, Atkinson, Foti-Gervais, and
          Condillac (2004) reported a variety of treatments including behavioral, including func-
          tional assessment techniques, crisis intervention, and counseling which can be imple-
          mented to decrease disruptive behaviors. The Feldman et al. (2004) review included
          children, adolescents, and adults, and the authors found that informal behavior inter-
                                                                     
          ventions were the most often implemented, with informal counseling being the least
          implemented treatment. Many of the behavior interventions reviewed were intrusive,
          including medication and restraint. Beail (2005) noted that aversive interventions have
          not been found to be more effective than non-aversive treatments; therefore, clinicians
          should consider alternatives in their program planning. For a more thorough review of
          specific behavior interventions, readers can refer to Matson et al. (2008).
                                                                     
          Phobia Treatments                                          
                                                                     
          Individuals with ID are at an increased risk for anxiety disorders; Dekker and Koot
          (2003) found in their large sample of individuals ages 7 to 20 that 21.9% met criteria
          for anxiety disorders, the largest of which was specific phobia at 17.5%. Literature
          on phobic avoidance was investigated by Jennett and Hagopian (2008) using defined
          criteria for empirical treatments in children, adolescents, and adults with ID. From
                                                                     
          the 13 reviewed studies, Jennett and Hagopian (2008) found that behavior treatments
          involving exposure and reinforcement were well established. CBT was less supported
          for treating phobic avoidance within the population. Additional research with children
          and adolescents should strengthen the understanding of effective treatments for the

=== Page 384 (1 cols) ===
370   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      elevated number of individuals with potential phobias. However, for the time being,
      clinicians can consider, as appropriate, implementing structured behavioral components
      in treating phobic behaviors.                                  
      Solution-Focused Brief Therapy (SFBT)                          
      There has been recent interest in use of SFBT with individuals with mild ID. Roeden,
      Maaskant, Bannink, and Curfs (2011) noted that the philosophy and focus of SFBT,
      empowerment and skill development versus deficits, could serve those with ID well
      (see Roeden et al., 2011 for more detailed description of SFBT). Although Roeden
      et al. (2011) focused treatment on adults with ID, the initial results were promising in
      goal attainment and improvement of individualized functioning. Individuals with more
      severe ID may have difficulty participating in traditional “talk”-based counseling; how-
      ever, Lloyd and Dallos (2008) investigated the use of SFBT with mothers of children
      with significant ID. Lloyd and Dallos (2008) found SFBT to be a useful tool in support-
      ing families, although some modifications were necessary (e.g., the “miracle question”
      was reported not to be helpful). As indicated by Prout and Browning (2011), any type
      of modification made to the treatment process for individuals with ID should be well
      definedsothatthemodificationsmaybereplicated.Cliniciansshoulddocumentchanges
      made to treatment protocols, for the individual and for future practice.
      Psychopharmacology                                             
      Although clinicians reading this chapter are more than likely not those who will
      be distributing medication, because of the high level of psychopharmaceutical inter-
      ventions potentially provided to children and adolescents with ID, it is important to
      note a few important points. The AACAP (1999) reported that medication effects
      “generally are not different from those expected in the absence of [ID]” (p. 1610).
      However, the AACAP (1999) reported several commonly occurring problems with
      psychopharmacology: (a) lack of informed consent; (b) not integrating medication into
      a comprehensive treatment plan; (c) lack of monitoring for side effects, especially for
                                                                     
      those who are nonverbal; and (d) not matching medication with comorbid diagnosis
      of record. Thus, clinicians involved in the beneficial “wraparound” or collabora-
      tive interdisciplinary approaches could assist in monitoring and collaborating with
      those overseeing medication management, for example, in structuring completion of
      medication monitoring forms across service providers and family.
                                                                     
      Progress Monitoring                                            
                                                                     
      Regardless of the therapy approach chosen, clinicians should be assessing the effective-
      ness of their implemented intervention. The AACAP (1999) reported that those work-
      ing with the individual with ID might have different interpretations of what is effective

=== Page 385 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 371
                                                                     
          and what is not effective. Therefore, in order to monitor progress in psychotherapy,
          “discrete treatment goals should be agreed upon by the clinician, individual, and care-
                                                                     
          givers, as well as a target or ‘index’ symptoms” (AACAP, 1999, p. 1610). Progress mon-
          itoring of ongoing therapy is difficult without counseling goals that are measurable and
          individualized. Generalization also should be considered for this population. Individu-
          als with ID might struggle to transfer skills learned in therapy to other settings, such
          as social skills. Clinicians working in the schools or in collaboration with the schools
          will find that frequent data collection related to goal attainment will facilitate commu-
          nication with the family and meaningfulness of treatment. Clinicians also will want to
                                                                     
          include the individual with ID as much as is appropriate and possible in goal planning
          and monitoring of those goals; for example, the adolescent might graph the frequency
          of their appropriate peer interactions during a lunch period, as monitored by a teacher
          assistant. Visually representing progress toward a goal can make therapy and the thera-
          peutic progress more meaningful for individuals with ID. Additionally, graphing progress
          could increase self-efficacy and self-advocacy.            
                                                                     
          Summary for Individuals with Intellectual Disability       
                                                                     
          Children and adolescents with ID deserve comprehensive treatment that is individual-
          ized and based on their unique abilities. In addition to the typically recognized instruc-
          tional needs in academic and adaptive skills is that of mental health supports. Although
          rates vary, comorbid psychopathology appears to affect a good portion of individuals
          with ID. Research has focused on behavioral issues and treatment over social and men-
                                                                     
          tal health. In fact, disagreement about the nature of psychotherapy, its association with
          ID and mental illness, and overgeneralized attribution of behavior being part of ID,
          have all served to confound the ultimate goal of effective treatment. However, we con-
          clude and recommend the following: (a) individuals with ID are more likely than the
          general population to experience psychopathology, (b) assessment should include tools
          to further investigate such comorbidity, and (c) upon identification, clinicians should
          include formal, goal directed treatment plans to address individual profiles of children
                                                                     
          and adolescents with ID.                                   
                                                                     
          LEARNING DISABILITY                                        
                                                                     
          Learning disabilities (LD) similarly encompasses a heterogeneous group of children and
          adolescents. At the core of the disability are struggles with components of academic pro-
                                                                     
          cessing, across reading, math, and/or writing domains. The APA (2013) reported that
          across the academic areas, the prevalence of LD is 5% to 15% for children from dif-
          ferent languages and cultures. Moreover, LD is found to occur more in males than in
          females, between 2:1 and 3:1 (APA, 2013). Skull and Winkler (2011) reported national

=== Page 386 (1 cols) ===
372   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      data from 2009 to 2010, which indicated that 2.43 million children or 4.9% of the stu-
      dent body meet special education criteria for LD. Of those serviced in special education,
      LD comprises the largest proportion of children, at 37.5% (Skull & Winkler, 2011).
      Thus, clinicians in schools and private practice will more than likely work with children
      and adolescents with LD.                                       
      Identification                                                 
      The revised DSM-5 (APA, 2013) outlined criteria for Learning Disorder, noting it as
      a neurodevelopmental disorder manifesting in difficulty acquiring academic skills, not
      due to intellectual disability, in the areas of reading, written expression, and mathemat-
      ics. The terms dyscalculia and dysgraphia are not being recommended now, and instead
      the broader term of learning disorder is used (APA, 2013). In the schools, there has been
      no more controversial area of assessment and placement than that of specific learning
      disabilities (SLD). SLD has garnered much attention in the literature and in practice,
      related around the philosophy of identifying these individuals; specifically whether to
      use the IQ/achievement discrepancy model, a Response to Intervention (RTI) model,
      or other models (e.g., cognitive processing). The mandate from the federal law (IDEA,
      U.S. Department of Education, 2004) has allowed individual states to determine their
      methodology of LD identification, resulting in great variation depending on residence
      (Berkeley, Bender, Peaster, & Saunders, 2009). IDEA (U.S. Department of Education,
      2004) has set forth eight areas for SLD (e.g., basic reading, math calculation, written
      expression,oralexpression),whereastudentwhoisnotmeetinggradelevelexpectations
      or responding to interventions implemented in one of the outlined areas could poten-
      tially qualify. Those who are interested in learning more about the assessment process of
      SLD in the schools should refer to Lichtenstein (2008).        
      Special Issues and Social-Emotional Concerns                   
      The AACAP (1998) reported that individuals with LD and language disorders
                                                                     
      experience elevated rates of comorbid psychiatric syndromes. DuPaul, Gormley, and
      Laracy (2013) reported that LD and ADHD exist at a higher rate than even previously
      thought, up to 45.1%, with the inclusion of writing disorders. McNamara, Vervaeke,
      and Willoughby (2008) found that adolescents with LD and comorbid LD/ADHD were
      more likely than peers without LD to engage in risky behaviors (e.g., use marijuana;
      engage in acts of minor delinquency). Another area that has been frequently associated
      with LD is depression. In a meta-analytic review, Nelson and Harwood (2011) found
                                                                     
      depressive symptoms in students with LD to occur significantly more than in students
      with non-LD (d                                                 
                 =                                                   
                   .75). Further, even without diagnosed comorbid conditions, indi-
      viduals with LD may encounter other problems, such as social skill deficits and low
      self-esteem (AACAP, 1998; Kavale & Mostert, 2004). In fact, Kavale and Forness

=== Page 387 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 373
                                                                     
          (1995) reported that up to 75% of children with SLD had deficits in social skills as
          compared to peers without an SLD.                          
                                                                     
          Therapeutic Approaches                                     
                                                                     
          Given the higher reported levels of comorbid problems for individuals with LD,
          clinicians should consider an array of treatments. Leichtentritt and Shechtman (2010)
          reported that challenges encountered by those with SLD go beyond skill deficits, which
          necessitate a broader “spectrum of intervention and a focus on growth and empower-
                                                                     
          ment.” (p. 169). Yet, the question remains: What characteristics are unique to individu-
          als with LD that could influence benefits of therapy? At its core, as aforementioned, LD
          relates to difficulty processing components of academic materials (e.g., difficulty with
          phonemic awareness, difficulty with abstract math reasoning). There have been some
          questions about cognitive processing for children and adolescents with LD, but not
          investigatedtothesameextentasindividualswithID,suchthatmodificationshavebeen
          systematically studied in treatment approaches. The AACAP (1998) reported that psy-
                                                                     
          chotherapy with individualswith LD should be tailored to individualneeds, for example,
          if the child found aspects of language challenging, nonverbal approaches such as games,
          activities, and computers might result in more participation. Another characteristic
          that might impact therapy is metacognition, which is an area of difficulty for many
          individuals with LD. Difficulty with metacognitive processes may negatively impact the
          ability of the child with LD to accurately report emotions during psychotherapy.
            In many ways, outside of the school setting, a layperson might not be able to distin-
                                                                     
          guish between a child with LD versus a child without LD. However, often children and
          adolescents, as a result of their LD, face additional challenges that warrant a combined
          approachtoeducationalservicesandpsychotherapeuticintervention.Forexample,chil-
          dren with LD often experience negative attitudes from peers, teachers, and other adults,
          as well as feelings of isolation (Lambie & Milsom, 2010). Although there are some vary-
          ing hypotheses on why difficulties in social and emotional adjustment are often expe-
          rienced by those with LD, negative school experiences might occur and could inform
                                                                     
          aspects of treatment.                                      
            Another consideration of treatment is when externalizing behaviors are exhibited by
          children with LD. Lambie and Milsom (2010) identify the “age-old issue” of whether
          children exhibit externalizing problems due to a preference to look “bad” over “dumb.”
          Students with LD might exhibit comorbid behavior problems as a result of academic
          deficits. Thus, therapeutic approaches need to investigate the function of behavioral dif-
                                                                     
          ficulties when intervening in both academic and behavioral domains. Lastly, although
          fidelity of manualized programs is preferred, if treating an individual with a reading
          disability, modifications to materials might be necessary to address difficulties with read-
          ing,understandingvocabulary,orcomprehendingquestions.Similarly,whenconducting

=== Page 388 (1 cols) ===
374   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      CBT with a student with a writing LD and depression, the clinician should consider
      slight modifications. For example, instead of having the adolescent complete home-
      work recording negative thoughts on paper, an alternate method might be use of a
      tape recorder.                                                 
        Martinez and Semrud-Clikeman (2004) compared adolescents with multiple LD
      (e.g., reading LD and math LD) to those with a single LD and typical achieving
      peers. In contrast to expectations, Martinez and Semrud-Clikeman (2004) found no
      differences between the emotional adjustment of individuals with one or more LD;
      however, both groups experienced poorer adjustment and more emotional symptoms
      when compared to the matched group. McNamara et al. (2008) reported psychosocial
      components, such as engagement in school and extracurricular activities and feelings
      of well-being, served as protective factors for students with LD. Protective factors can
      serve to enhance outcomes for children with LD, potentially preventing development
      of psychopathology.                                            
      Group Counseling                                               
      The unique learning profile and potential comorbid social and emotional problems of
      children and adolescents with LD might make clinicians question the utility of group
      counseling. Can individuals with LD participate and interact in such a group setting?
      LeichtentrittandShechtman(2010)reviewedevidenceandconcludedthatgroupcoun-
      seling has been shown to improve social and emotional functioning in this population.
      Leichtentritt and Shechtman (2010) also studied a large sample of children ages 10 to
      18 with LD compared to non-LD students, investigating outcomes after group coun-
      seling. Specific techniques utilized in the groups were supportive-expressive, involving
      a mixture of cognitive and behavioral techniques with modifications for the age range
      (e.g., bibliotherapy, therapeutic gains). Despite differences in academic achievement,
      the LD and non-LD students demonstrated similar social and emotional gains with
      decreases in anxiety and aggression. Mishna, Muskat, and Wiener (2010) also inves-
      tigated group counseling for middle school students with LD, piloting a manualized
      treatment approach based on self-psychology and interpersonal group treatment. The
      intervention was implemented directly in the schools. Mishna et al. (2010) found sup-
      port for the group therapy from parent and student interviews. Additional research with
      RCTs would provide more evidence for this approach; however, initial results suggest
      that clinicians may successfully utilize group therapy to target social and emotional con-
      cerns for individuals with LD.                                 
                                                                     
      Solution-Focused Brief Therapy                                 
                                                                     
      Franklin, Biever, Moore, Clemons, and Scamardo (2001) investigated use of SBFT with
      young adolescents (ages 10 to 13) with LD. Many of the participants were diagnosed
      with comorbid conditions, such as ADHD and anxiety disorders. Five of seven students

=== Page 389 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 375
                                                                     
          experienced significant improvement in their externalizing or internalizing behaviors.
          Franklin et al. (2001) found the flexibility of SBFT appropriate and helpful for the LD
                                                                     
          population. Further, the action-oriented nature of SBFT appears to provide the individ-
          ual with LD an outlet to focus on goals to accomplish, rather than skill deficits faced
          in academic settings. Although additional research is clearly needed regarding SFBT,
          due to the nature of the approach, it should be considered as an option for children and
          adolescents with LD.                                       
                                                                     
          Social Skills Training                                     
                                                                     
          Social skill deficits have been well documented in individuals with LD. Yet, the effec-
          tiveness of social skills training has been questioned for various populations. One such
          reason is targeted skills have, at times, failed to generalize outside of the training session.
          For example, a student may learn how to appropriately take turns in a small group or
          with an adult, but may not take turns appropriately with peers on the playground or in
          the gym. Regardless, Kavale and Mostert (2004) indicated that social skills training has
          become a widely adopted intervention for children and adolescents with LD. However,
                                                                     
          in a meta-analysis, Kavale and Mostert (2004) reported that social skills interventions
          for this population had limited impact on social functioning. The review indicated that
          additional research was needed, specifically regarding the length of intervention, use of
          specific social skill programs, and in-group differences (Kavale & Mostert, 2004). At this
          time, authors recommend that clinicians consider implementing social skills training, if
          indicated, but do so with clear planning for generalization and ongoing monitoring of
                                                                     
          effectiveness.                                             
          Parent Training                                            
                                                                     
          Unfortunately, students with LD may be viewed as “lazy” or “indifferent,” which can
          impact academic and social functioning. Therefore, parent, and sometimes teacher,
          training and consultation might be warranted. Specific education on the nature of LD,
          how LD manifests, and unique individual characteristics should be emphasized, when
                                                                     
          necessary. The AACAP (1998) noted that the clinician might work with the family to
          develop both a supportive home environment and a consistent home to school program
          of reinforcement. Encouragement and consistency may ultimately provide a protective
          factor from more negative school and peer experiences (e.g., Mishna et al., 2010).
          Additionally, clinicians in the private sector should be aware of state education policies
          on LD to help determine the extent and nature of school-based services appropriate for
          children served.                                           
                                                                     
          Other Therapies                                            
                                                                     
          In reviewing the literature on LD, some therapies have been reported for children and
          adolescents. CBT has begun to emerge as a therapeutic technique for individuals with

=== Page 390 (1 cols) ===
376   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      LD (Shechtman & Pastor, 2005). CBT has been shown to be effective for treating
      anxiety and depressive symptoms for children and adolescents (Compton et al., 2004);
      thus, CBT should be considered as a psychotherapeutic technique for individuals with
      LD given appropriate developmental or cognitive modifications due to academic or
      processing deficits. Shechtman and Pastor (2005) also found initial support for human-
      istic psychotherapy, modified for adolescents with LD. The authors noted that more
      research was needed to document the potential benefits of humanistic psychotherapy, as
      it was found to be more effective than CBT within their sample (Shechtman & Pastor,
      2005). Mindfulness training, which incorporates components of CBT, has also received
      initial support for adolescents with LD and comorbid ADHD (Haydicky, Wiener, Badali,
      Milligan, & Ducharme, 2012).                                   
      Progress Monitoring                                            
      Tiered interventions, a component of RTI, might also be considered for individuals with
      SLD and comorbid conditions. Within the schools, students with LD will often need
      to be pulled out of regular education classrooms for intensive, direct academic instruc-
      tion. Therefore, clinicians in the schools might consider implementing interventions
      in the classroom or in small group format. For example, a school psychologist could
      implement a whole class social skills program weekly (e.g., Second Step; Committee for
      Children, 2004) or target a small group with anxiety symptoms after school (e.g., Coping
      Cat; Kendall & Hedtke, 2006). Additionally, group, rather than individual therapy, may
      be considered to provide opportunities for generalization and to practice social skills
      required for group interactions.                               
        As mentioned with individuals with ID, students with LD benefit from develop-
      ment of concrete therapeutic goals with their input. Further, to ensure that the treat-
      ment selected is beneficial, ongoing progress monitoring of goals should be carried out.
      DependingonthenatureoftheLD,cliniciansshouldinvolvestudentsinthemonitoring
      process. As noted earlier, therapy should be a time where academics are not the focus,
      and utilizing individual strengths is strongly recommended to support therapeutic tech-
      niques and goals. Clinicians should also work in conjunction with parents, especially for
      social skill development. Incorporating parent involvement will help facilitate better
      generalization beyond group sessions. Overall, ongoing monitoring and collaborative
      methods will be beneficial for psychotherapy for individuals with LD.
                                                                     
      Summary for Individuals with Learning Disabilities             
                                                                     
      ChildrenandadolescentswithLDoftenexperiencechallengesbeyondtheirspecificaca-
      demic deficits, including low self-esteem, difficulties with peer interactions, and poten-
      tial comorbid conditions such as depression, anxiety, and ADHD. Therefore, clinicians
      working with children and adolescents with LD should assess for comorbid concerns,

=== Page 391 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 377
                                                                     
          and consequently consider the implementation of therapeutic techniques extending
          beyond academic skill building. Continued research comparing various therapies will
                                                                     
          help clinicians select specific treatments. At this time, most psychotherapy techniques
          implemented for individuals without LD may be implemented with close progress mon-
          itoring for those with LD. Notwithstanding, there are certainly additional factors to
          consider for this population, including potential cognitive processing differences, the
          nature of the LD (e.g., basic reading), and various social and emotional challenges faced
          on a daily basis with the learning process. Clinicians will likely initiate a more effective
          therapeutic alliance if they have a good understanding of LD, in general, and the unique
                                                                     
          abilities of children and adolescents seen in therapy.     
                                                                     
          TRAUMATIC  BRAIN INJURY                                    
                                                                     
          Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is defined as “an alteration in brain function, or other
          evidence of brain pathology, caused by an external force” (Brain Injury Association of
                                                                     
          America [BIAA], 2013). Within the larger group of causes of acquired brain damage,
          TBIs are separate from nontraumatic brain injuries, which result in brain damage that is
          not due to external physical force, such as brain tumors or vascular accidents. As such,
          the main difference between TBI and non-TBI is the presence of an external force
          impacting the skull and brain. Common causes of TBI include motor vehicle accidents,
          falls, gunshot wounds, and sports-related injuries (Bloom, Cohen, & Campbell, 2006).
            Annually, 62,000 children sustain TBIs that require hospitalization and 564,000 visit
                                                                     
          emergency departments and do not require hospitalization (BIAA, 2013). TBI is the
          leading cause of death and disability in children and adolescents in the United States,
          with the two age groups at greatest risk for experiencing TBI being children between
          ages 0 to 4 and adolescents between ages 15 to 19 (BIAA, 2013). Males are at greater
          risk for suffering a TBI when compared to females, a difference with onset around the
          age of 5 that continues into adolescence. Causes of TBI also vary with age. For example,
          child abuse is a leading cause of brain injury among infants (roughly 25%; Wade, Walz,
                                                                     
          & Bosques, 2009), and falls account for more than half of TBIs for children under the age
          of 5. In the school-age years, pedestrian, bicycle, and motor vehicle accidents account
          for the majority of TBIs. Incidence rates increase each year from birth to age 14, then
          rise sharply beginning at age 15; motor vehicle accidents are thought to account for the
          majority of the increase (Bloom et al., 2006).             
                                                                     
          Overview of Pathophysiology and Impact of Traumatic Brain Injury
                                                                     
          It is important to have a basic understanding of the pathophysiology of TBI and its
          impact on various aspects of central nervous system functioning as specific neurocog-
          nitive deficits and strengths should guide psychotherapeutic intervention. TBI injuries

=== Page 392 (1 cols) ===
378   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      result in primary and secondary phases (see Bloom et al., 2006). Primary injuries result
      in damage to tissue and bleeding directly resulting from the traumatic impact, while
      secondary injuries arise from complications from the initial injury.
      Primary Injuries                                               
      In closed head injuries, an external force, such as hitting concrete during a fall, causes
      the brain to repeatedly contact the skull, damaging tissue with each impact. The damage
      occurs despite the brain being suspended in cerebrospinal fluid. Damage to the brain
      occurs at the point of impact (i.e., the coup) and at the brain area opposite the original
      point of impact (i.e., the countercoup). Brain damage frequently occurs at both the coup
      and contrecoup impact points. During impact, rough-edged bone within the front and
      base of the skull may preferentially damage the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain.
      The configuration of the skull helps explain how damage to the frontal and temporal
      lobes may occur when blows to the back of the head are experienced or when the head
      does not strike an external object, such as a windshield, during a motor vehicle accident
      (i.e., noncontact TBI). Rapid, twisting movements of the brain may also occur during
      impact and result in stretching, shearing, and tearing of blood vessels and nerve fibers.
      Damaged axons undergo a series of changes that may cause cellular death. Furthermore,
      neurons may also be damaged by excessive release of excitatory neurotransmitters after
      an injury.                                                     
      Secondary Injuries                                             
      Secondary injuries are experienced from resultant physiological processes, such as hem-
      orrhage, hematoma, and seizure. A hemorrhage occurs when blood from the vascular
      system contacts tissues of the brain, where the blood may cause damage. A hematoma
      (i.e., clotting of a mass of blood) may also occur due to broken blood vessels. Physio-
      logical problems may also yield secondary injuries; for example, anoxia (i.e., a lack of
      oxygen) or hypoxia (i.e., insufficient oxygen) may arise if cardiovascular damage occurs.
                                                                     
      Outcomes                                                       
                                                                     
      Bloom et al. (2006) reviewed neuropsychological, psychological, behavioral, and family
      outcomes for children and adolescents who had sustained TBI. Authors found that intel-
      ligence tends to stabilize 1-year postinjury with individuals performing better on verbal
      cognitive ability measures versus nonverbal ability. Difficulties with executive function-
      ing,suchasorganizing,planning,anddisinhibitionwerecommonforindividualssustain-
                                                                     
      ing a severe TBI and attention problems were frequently observed across all individuals
      with TBI. Memory and learning difficulties are also common, with slower rate of learn-
      ing frequently found and verbal memory affected more than visual memory. Processing
      speed was slowed as a result of TBI and speech and language difficulties were common.

=== Page 393 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 379
                                                                     
          Within the group of speech and language outcomes, Bloom et al. (2006) also noted
          problems with understanding social communication as well as inferential language.
                                                                     
            Common behavioral and psychological sequelae include externalizing and internal-
          izing behavioral concerns. Common externalizing problems experienced by children
          and adolescents with TBI include inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity, with up
          to 44% of individuals meeting diagnostic criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity
          disorder (Bloom et al., 2006). Aggressive behavior is also sometimes exhibited as a
          result of TBI. Internalizing disorders frequently arise as a result of TBI, with up to 25%
          of individuals with severe TBI meeting criteria for a depressive disorder. Children and
                                                                     
          adolescents with TBI also exhibit a range of social difficulties, such as social problem
          solving, managing social conflict, and coordinating play activities to fit those of peers.
          In general, poorer outcomes are experienced for children when the injury is of greater
          severity and at a younger age. The presence of family conflict and psychiatric disorder
          within the family also predict poorer outcomes for children.
                                                                     
          Special Education Considerations                           
                                                                     
          TBI is identified as a special education category and requires public schools to provide
          children and adolescents with TBI a free and appropriate education if TBI is negatively
          impacting on the student’s academic attainment. Appropriate educational services may
          take the form of accommodations within general educational settings or other special
          education service delivery models. More restrictive special education service models
          include placement in a resource classroom setting or within a self-contained special edu-
                                                                     
          cation placement, depending on the needs of the child or adolescent. Speech/language,
          occupational, and physical therapies may also be provided as related services, depending
          on the neurocognitive impact of the child’s injury. It is likely that children and adoles-
          cents with moderate to severe TBI will need special education services and that such
          services will be provided for much of the child’s education.
                                                                     
          Special Issues and Social-Emotional Concerns               
                                                                     
          Novel attention difficulties, depression, anxiety, and behavior problems arise for a large
          minority of children and adolescents experiencing TBI. Social difficulties may also arise
          due to injuries, such as difficulties with accurately decoding and interpreting social
          information and exhibiting impaired social judgment. For many children with TBI,
          depression, low self-esteem, and frustration may arise due to loss of previously acquired
          academic, motor, and language skills. Motor impairments may compound social difficul-
                                                                     
          ties, such as a student with TBI who is unable to join peers during playground activities
          or participation in sports. Family coping and psychological functioning are often
          affected by TBI and, in turn, impact long-term outcomes. Given the complex interplay
          of factors involved in TBI, biopsychosocial models are offered to guide coordinated

=== Page 394 (1 cols) ===
380   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      intervention efforts. Biopsychosocial models emphasize the roles of biological factors,
      such as location and severity of the TBI, psychological factors, such as the child’s cogni-
      tive appraisal of the TBI and concomitant anxiety or depression, and social factors, such
      as the impact of TBI on parenting stress and quality of educational support. A general
      biopsychosocial conceptualization is helpful when thinking about hospitalization and
      school re-entry experiences for children and families affected by TBI.
      Hospitalization                                                
      Although experiences vary depending on the severity of TBI, children sustaining TBI
      will likely be seen in emergency departments, admitted for clinical care, and may
      experience lengthy admissions in rehabilitation hospitals to facilitate recovery. The cir-
      cumstances regarding the injury may prove traumatic for both child and family and
      may necessitate psychotherapeutic intervention. Children and adolescents with various
      illnesses and injuries may experience pediatric medical traumatic stress (PMTS), which
      is defined as psychological and physiological responses of children and families related
      to illness, injury, and invasive or frightening treatment experiences; PMTS includes
      acute stress disorder and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD; Kazak, Schneider, &
      Kassam-Adams, 2009). Kazak et al. (2009) describe a three-phase model of medical
      trauma staged according to the timing of the medical event: (1) Phase I: Peritrauma
      (During and Immediately Following the Medical Event); (2) Phase II: Early, Ongoing
      and Evolving Responses, and (3) Phase III: Longer-term PMTS. Goals for therapy differ
      across phases. The therapeutic goal for Phase I is to alter the subjective experience of
      the medical event, the goal for Phase II is to reduce or prevent PMTS, and the goal for
      Phase III intervention is to treat symptoms of PTSD. In Phase III, Kazak et al. (2009)
      recommend a combination of cognitive-behavior and family therapy.
      School Reentry                                                 
      For children and adolescents with TBI, particularly those with moderate to severe
                                                                     
      injuries requiring hospitalization, the timing and process of reentering the school
      environment are important clinical decisions to consider. For children with TBI and
      other chronic illnesses, the general belief is that return to pre-injury or prediagnosis
      activities as soon as medically feasible facilitates rehabilitation and psychological
      adjustment (Madan-Swain, Katz, & LaGory, 2004). During medical stabilization and
      subsequent rehabilitation, children and adolescents with TBI will likely be absent
      from school and have little contact with peers and school professionals. Many regular
                                                                     
      and special education teachers report little prior experience working with children
      with TBI and will likely need assistance and ongoing consultation with others, such
      as pediatric psychologists, school psychologists, speech-language pathologists, among
      others, to support the child’s educational needs. Peers may also have questions about the

=== Page 395 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 381
                                                                     
          circumstances regarding the child’s TBI and may need specific guidance and instruction
          regarding how best to support their classmate with TBI.    
                                                                     
            Madan-Swain et al. (2004) describe a three-phase school reentry model for children
          with TBI and other health conditions that target the needs identified above. Phase I
          involves initial hospitalization, planning for homebound instruction, and planning for
          school reentry. Critical therapeutic goals and activities are to emphasize the importance
          of return to school as well as to coordinate hospital and school planning. Phase II
          involves contact with and education of school personnel. Phase II activities emphasize
          educational assessment and programming, education of and consultation with teachers
                                                                     
          and school personnel, peer education, and family support. Within Phase II, IEP devel-
          opment and initial implementation occurs. Phase III involves follow-up contact with
          the family, school professionals, and medical team members. Clinical activities within
          Phase III center on ongoing consultation and modification of school-based services
          as needed.                                                 
                                                                     
          Family and Parent Issues                                   
                                                                     
          TBIs affect parents and families in various areas. Parents report significant levels of
          burden and distress, with as many as one-third of caregivers experiencing significant lev-
          els of anxiety, depression, and social adjustment difficulties, particularly when the TBI is
          severe(Hawley,Ward,Magnay,&Long,2003).Forchildrenwhorequirehospitaladmis-
          sion, parents may worry about the survival of their child, and may experience feelings of
          guilt regarding the circumstances of the injury (Hawley et al., 2003). As many as 41% of
                                                                     
          parents report a significant increase in parenting stress due to their child’s TBI (Hawley
          et al., 2003). Increased stress is likely due to the increased dependency of the child with
          TBI. Due to increased stress and negative emotionality experienced as a result of their
          child’s injury, parents often warrant psychotherapeutic intervention. The functioning
          of parents and family, however, also predict child outcomes directly or indirectly and
          family-based intervention has been shown to be beneficial in multiple areas, including
          reducing parenting stress and improving children’s behavioral adjustment.
                                                                     
          Therapeutic Approaches                                     
                                                                     
          Several published reviews of the TBI intervention literature have concluded that much
          more is known regarding behavioral and emotional outcomes for children with TBI when
          compared to social-emotional and behavioral interventions to improve such outcomes
          (e.g., Warschausky, Kewman, & Kay, 1999). As with other intellectual and develop-
                                                                     
          mental disabilities, the dominant approach is based on behavior therapy that targets
          specific problem behaviors during intervention. There are, however, several cognitive
          and family-based interventions that have been developed, utilized, and evaluated for
          children with TBI.

=== Page 396 (1 cols) ===
382   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Behavioral Approaches                                          
      Review of the TBI intervention literature reveals that the majority of published work
      employs behavioral interventions that are typically grounded in methods of applied
      behavior analysis, such as understanding the antecedent and consequent conditions
      associated with specific behaviors (see Laatsch et al., 2007; Slifer & Amari, 2009, for
      reviews). Various behavioral approaches, such as operant and antecedent interventions,
      have been utilized to manage and reduce impulsive, aggressive, and disruptive behav-
      iors, so-called squeaky wheel behaviors (Warschausky et al., 1999) exhibited by chil-
      dren and adolescents with TBI. The evidentiary support for using behavioral therapy
      relies on findings from single-case research designs. Varied behavioral targets, such as
      verbal aggression, physical aggression, noncompliance, impulsivity, and screaming, have
      responded to applied behavioral intervention methods. Behavioral interventions shown
      to be effective in reducing problem behaviors have also ranged widely includingdifferen-
      tial reinforcement of other behavior, token economies, extinction, time-out procedures,
      and combinations of behavioral techniques. Behavioral interventions targeting problem
      behaviors have also been delivered successfully across varied contexts, such as within
      rehabilitation programs, residential schools, public schools, or within the child’s home
      (Ylvisaker et al., 2007).                                      
      Family Therapy and Parent Intervention                         
      As noted earlier, TBI impacts family functioning which is associated with various child
      outcomes. Despite consensus that family functioning is a critical area for intervention,
      few systematic interventions have been developed and evaluated to date. One notable
      exception is a family-centered problem-solving intervention (FPS) developed and
      evaluated by Wade, Michaud, and Brown (2006). FPS is a structured family-based
      intervention designed for implementation over a 6-month period using seven biweekly
      therapy sessions to provide orientation and training in the problem-solving approach
                                                                     
      and up to four additional sessions to address other problems encountered by the family.
      Each session consists of a didactic component and applied problem-solving component.
      Didactic content consists of TBI-tailored information about the possible effects of
      TBI on memory, attention, learning, and behavior as well as strategies to address
      such difficulties. Other didactic content focuses on family communication, handling
      family crises, and structuring the environment to facilitate optimal adjustment for the
      child with TBI.                                                
                                                                     
        The FPS intervention employs a five-step problem-solving skills framework, referred
      to as the ABCDE model. The five steps of the ABCDE model consist of (a) identi-
      fying targeted problem areas (i.e., Aims phase), (b) generating solutions to solve the
      problem (i.e., Brainstorming phase), (c) selecting a solution from those generated

=== Page 397 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 383
                                                                     
          (i.e., Choosing phase), (d) implementing the solution selected (i.e., Do it phase), and
          (e) determining if the enacted solution was successful (i.e., Evaluation phase). The
                                                                     
          general goals of FPS therapy are to engender a positive approach to solving problems
          and equip the family with skills to solve problems after therapy completion. That is, the
          ABCDE model of problem solving is designed to be applied to new problems that may
          arise after FPS therapy is ended.                          
            Using an RCT design, Wade et al. (2006) contrasted child adjustment and parental
          distress outcomes between FPS and a usual care condition. Analyses revealed signifi-
          cant differences in parent-rated child internalizing problems, anxiety, depression, and
                                                                     
          social withdrawal in favor of FPS. Parental distress and parent-child conflict did not
          differ across groups nor change over time as a result of either FPS or standard care.
          Overall, initial findings suggest a family-centered problem-solving approach is beneficial
          in improving child internalizing behaviors.                
            Investigators have also targeted reduction of parenting stress within a small group
          therapy format. Singer et al. (1994) evaluated the impact of a 9-week stress manage-
          ment program specifically targeting parents of children with brain injury, mostly TBI.
                                                                     
          The stress management program consisted of psychoeducational instruction in coping
          skills and parent-to-parent social support. For each 2-hour session, the therapist intro-
          duced, taught, and modeled specific coping skills, such as progressive muscle relaxation,
          monitoring stress levels, and altering negative self-talk during stressful situations. Group
          participants practiced skills and completed homework assignments between group ses-
          sions with weekly phone contact provided to help with homework assignments. Authors
          evaluated the benefits of the stress management program in contrast to an information
                                                                     
          and emotion support group program. Statistical analysis revealed significant reductions
          in parent-reported depression and anxiety for parents in the stress management program
          when compared to the informational group. The findings suggest that explicit training
          and practice in active coping for parents may reduce stress, improve psychological func-
          tioning, and, ultimately, improve family functioning and child mental health outcomes.
                                                                     
          Social Interventions                                       
                                                                     
          Children with TBI report social outcomes as more important than academic, physical, or
          sports-relatedfunctioning;however,socialinteractiondifficultiesarefrequentlyencoun-
          teredbythegroup.Afewinvestigatorshavedeliveredinterventionwithinthecontextof
          school-based social networks (see Warschausky et al., 1999, for a brief overview). Social
          network interventions target development of a supportive team of peers, teachers, and
                                                                     
          parents to increase social contact, social acceptance, and social interactions within the
          school setting. Research findings suggest that, unfortunately, initial social benefits are
          not sustained when the coordinating therapist ends involvement in the intervention
          (Warschausky et al., 1999).

=== Page 398 (1 cols) ===
384   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      PHYSICAL DISABILITY                                            
      The term physical disability is used variably in the literature and sometimes includes
      children with acquired brain and spinal cord injury or chronic health conditions, such
      as asthma, and sometimes not. For the purposes of the chapter, the authors adopt an
      inclusive use of the term physical disability to describe children covered by the ortho-
      pedic impairment and other health impairment (OHI) categories of special education
      established in IDEA (2004). As such, the definition for orthopedic impairment is:
         Orthopedic impairment means a severe orthopedic impairment that adversely
         affectsachild’seducationalperformance.Thetermincludesimpairmentscaused
         by a congenital anomaly, impairments caused by disease (e.g., poliomyelitis,
         bone tuberculosis), and impairments from other causes (e.g., cerebral palsy,
         amputations, and fractures or burns that cause contractures).
        Similarly, the federal definition of OHI follows:            
         Other health impairment means having limited strength, vitality, or alertness,
         includingaheightenedalertnesstoenvironmentalstimuli,thatresultsinlimited
         alertness with respect to the educational environment, that (i) Is due to chronic
         or acute health problems such as asthma, attention deficit disorder or attention
         deficit hyperactivity disorder, diabetes, epilepsy, a heart condition, hemophilia,
         lead poisoning, leukemia, nephritis, rheumatic fever, sickle cell anemia, and
         Tourette syndrome; and (ii) Adversely affects a child’s educational performance.
                                                                     
        As reflected in the IDEA definition, a wide range of causes of orthopedic impairment
      is captured, including various congenital anomalies and inherited conditions, such as
      spina bifida and Duchenne muscular dystrophy. The definition also includes diseases
      that may cause orthopedic impairment, such as juvenile rheumatoid arthritis or various
      childhood cancers, such as sarcomas. A range of other causes are included in the final
      portion of the IDEA definition, such as broken bones, amputations, or burns. The final
      definition also includes mention of contracture, which is a fixed tightening of muscle,
                                                                     
      ligaments, tendons, or skin that prevents normal movement of a part of the body. For
      example, a severe hand burn may cause contracture of skin that limits finger movements
      and reduces functional skills. Likewise, the special education category of OHI includes
      various chronic illnesses that may affect educational performance.
                                                                     
      Special Issues and Social-Emotional Concerns                   
                                                                     
      Similar to TBI and the larger literature on pediatric illness and injury, a general
      approach to intervention with children and adolescents with physical disabili-
      ties should be grounded in a biopsychosocial conceptualization. Although general

=== Page 399 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 385
                                                                     
          biopsychosocial models are helpful in understanding psychosocial risks and planning
          clinical intervention, children with differing physical disabilities appear to experience
                                                                     
          different risks for adjustment problems and psychological difficulties. For example,
          children with physical disabilities and chronic illness that affect the central nervous
          system (CNS) may experience greater academic and learning difficulties. A few
          illustrative examples follow within the brief overview of social-emotional concerns for
          children and adolescents with physical disabilities.       
            Children with physical disabilities and chronic illnesses are more depressed than typ-
          ical peers; however, children with fibromyalgia, cleft lip and palate, and epilepsy, among
                                                                     
          others, experience greater degree of depression within the larger group of children with
          physical illness (Pinquart & Shen, 2011a). Children with physical disabilities demon-
          strate higher levels of internalizing, externalizing, and total behavior problems when
          compared to typical peers (Pinquart & Shen, 2011b). Some variability exists within
          the published literature, however, with students with epilepsy and chronic headaches
          demonstrating higher levels of externalizing problems when compared to other children
          with physical illnesses.                                   
                                                                     
            Children with physical disabilities and chronic illness also experience lower levels of
          academic, physical, and social functioning when compared to typical peers (Pinquart
          & Teubert, 2012). As may be expected, impairments related to physical functioning
          are greater than both academic and social functional impairments. Children with spina
          bifida and cerebral palsy are also more likely to experience difficulties with academic,
          physical,andsocialfunctioningwhencomparedtoothergroupsofchildrenwithchronic
          physical conditions (Pinquart & Teubert, 2012). The belief is that spina bifida, cerebral
                                                                     
          palsy, and other disorders that affect CNS functioning result in cognitive impairments
          that affect academic learning and accurate understanding of social information.
                                                                     
          Family and Parent Issues                                   
          As with other disabilities, physical disability is often associated with increased parent-
                                                                     
          ing stress. Parent-child relationships and parenting behaviors also differ between fami-
          lies with a child with chronic illness and those without (Pinquart, 2013). Parent-child
          relationshipstend to be less positive and characterized by lowerlevelsof parental respon-
          siveness and less warmth when compared to families of healthy children. Parent-child
          relationships for children with epilepsy are found to be more affected, in general, than
          other groups of children with physical disability (Pinquart, 2013). Parents also demon-
          strate higher levels of demandingness as evidenced by controlling parenting behavior
                                                                     
          and overprotectiveness when compared to parents of healthy children.
            Physical disability and chronic illness also affect siblings’ adjustment and well-
          being. A comprehensive review documented that siblings’ emotional and behav-
          ioral adjustment is negatively affected by presence of chronic illness (Sharpe &

=== Page 400 (1 cols) ===
386   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Rossiter, 2002). Siblings experience more internalizing problems, such as anxiety and
      depression, than externalizing problems, such as aggression. Sibling self-concept and
      peer activities are also negatively impacted by the presence of chronic illness. Across
      the board, however, parent-reported problems are more negative when compared to
      sibling-reported problems, which may reflect parent sensitivity to negative outcomes
      for siblings (Sharpe & Rossiter, 2002). Sibling adjustment was also more negatively
      affected when the illness proved more disruptive to daily family functioning, such as
      cancer and diabetes, when compared to less disruptive conditions, such as craniofacial
      anomalies.                                                     
      Therapeutic Approaches                                         
      Psychotherapy utilized with children and adolescents with physical illness may target
      a range of presenting concerns, such as increasing compliance with medical regimens,
      managing pain, reducing anxiety related to medical procedures, and increasing family
      functioning. Published research documents the benefits of psychotherapy for manage-
      ment of disability and illness as well as improving emotional and behavioral adjustment
      (Kibby, Tyc, & Mulhern, 1998). Well-supported evidence-based interventions also exist
      for managing pain associated with physical disabilities and chronic illnesses (Spirito
      & Kazak, 2006). Similarly, evidence-based interventions exist for reduction of anxi-
      ety and increased coping during medical procedures. Similar to the larger literature on
      child psychotherapy, the majority of evidence-based interventions employ behavioral
      and cognitive-behavioral methods.                              
      Behavioral Therapy                                             
      Behavioral techniques are well-supported for use with children with physical disabil-
      ities and chronic illness (Spirito & Kazak, 2006). Staple relaxation techniques have
      been used with this group, such as meditative breathing, diaphragmatic breathing,
      imagery-based relaxation, and progressive muscle relaxation (PMR). Relaxation tech-
                                                                     
      niques are portable and may prove helpful across various contexts, such as managing
      pain, tolerating medical procedures, and decreasing symptoms of anxiety. Breathing
      and PMR must be tailored for use with children with chronic illness as pulmonary
      and muscle functions may be compromised for some children. If PMR is not possible,
      imagery-based relaxation techniques should be considered.      
        If relaxation techniques will be utilized, the therapist should provide a rationale and
      description for the techniques; the justification should also be shared with parents,
                                                                     
      who may become incorporated as coaches for practice and prompting children to use
      relaxation. Spirito and Kazak (2006) describe a set of helpful preparatory steps to assess
      children’s abilities to use imagery, capacity to hold their breath, choices of adjectives
      (e.g., warm; yellow) to describe feelings of relaxation, and selections of favorite places

=== Page 401 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 387
                                                                     
          (e.g., beach) to utilize in relaxation scripts. Spirito and Kazak (2006) include detailed
          scripts for use and adaptation for children that incorporate meditative breathing,
                                                                     
          imagery-based relaxation, and self-directed imagery to achieve a deepened relaxation
          state. The scripts are designed to provide a general framework for relaxation and should
          be tailored for use with the individual by incorporating choice of adjectives, favorite
          places, and pacing of the script.                          
            Various behaviorally based approaches have been utilized with children with phys-
          ical disabilities and chronic illness. Operant approaches may be utilized to increase
          functional independence, improve compliance with medical procedures, and reduce
                                                                     
          externalizing behavior. As with other reinforcement-based techniques, targeted behav-
          iors should be clearly defined, reinforcers carefully selected, and reinforcement delivered
          consistently. Token economies may be utilized across various contexts, such as on a
          pediatric ward or within the home.                         
                                                                     
          Cognitive Techniques                                       
                                                                     
          Cognitive-behavioral therapeutic techniques have also been utilized and supported
          for children with physical disabilities and chronic illness. Problem-solving methods
          are organized and sequential cognitive techniques designed to increase children
          and adolescents’ cognitive flexibility and selection of adaptive solutions to various
          problems encountered. An approach recommended for use with children with physical
          disabilities and chronic illness is the “SOLVE” model. The SOLVE model utilizes
          five basic steps, with each step corresponding with a letter in the acronym. The S
                                                                     
          stands for “select a problem,” O is “options,” L stands for “likely outcomes,” V is “very
          best one,” and E stands for “evaluate” (see Spirito & Kazak, 2006, for sample script).
          The therapist introduces the model, reviews the steps involved with SOLVE, and
          illustrates the steps with a relevant decision, such as an adolescent’s nonadherence
          to treatment.                                              
            Cognitive coping skills are also recommended for use with children with physical dis-
                                                                     
          abilities and chronic illness to manage symptoms of anxiety and depression. As with
          relaxation techniques, cognitive coping skills are portable, flexible, and applicable to
          various clinical problems. The general approach is to provide a developmentally appro-
          priate description of the role of negative self-statements in signaling and exacerbating
          feelings of anxiety or depression and teaching adaptive self-talk (Spirito & Kazak, 2006).
          Identifying and countering negative self-statements are active ingredients in cognitive
          coping skills training and may be followed by an abbreviated relaxation procedure if the
                                                                     
          goal is to reduce anxiety. For younger children, tangible reinforcement, such as selecting
          a small prize or toy, is recommended for reinforcing efforts with cognitive coping pro-
          cedures. Therapist modeling of cognitive coping and, if applicable, relaxation are also
          recommended when using this procedure.

=== Page 402 (1 cols) ===
388   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Family Interventions                                           
      Given the impact of physical disability and chronic illness on the family system,
      family-based interventions have been developed and utilized. Several empirically
      supported family-based interventions exist for children with physical disabilities and
      chronic health conditions. The goals of family intervention may be to provide general
      supportive psychotherapy as families cope with physical disability; however, targeted
      family interventions appear to be more beneficial, such as improving adherence
      to treatment, reducing distress associated with medical procedures, and providing
      psychoeducation to the family to increase disease-specific knowledge and management
      (Spirito & Kazak, 2006).                                       
        Several structured protocols exist with evidentiary support for specific difficulties
      encountered with different conditions, such as adherence with treatment for dia-
      betes and psychoeducational family therapy for sickle cell disease. A good example
      of a manualized family-based program targeting a specific problem associated with
      a specific disorder is the Surviving Cancer Competently Intervention Program
      (SCCIP), which is designed to reduce the distress associated with cancer and its
      attendant treatment (Spirito & Kazak, 2006). SCCIP is a single-day manualized
      intervention targeting reduction of posttraumatic stress symptoms for adolescent
      cancer survivors and their families. SCCIP is delivered in a group format and the
      single day is divided into four sessions that total five hours. Group content centers
      on cognitive-behavioral techniques that include linking antecedent triggers, such
      as follow-up clinic appointments, to beliefs, such as thoughts about recurrence, to
      emotional consequences, such as fear and anxiety. Participants are taught how to use
      reframing techniques to minimize the impact of negative thoughts, such as accepting
      uncontrollable aspects of the situation, focusing on what is controllable, and emphasiz-
      ing the positive aspects of situations. SCCIP also includes multifamily group discussions
      regarding how cancer has impacted their families, how they have coped previously,
      and how skills learned during the intervention may be used to positively impact
      their future adjustment (see Spirito & Kazak, 2006, for detailed information about
      session content).                                              
        Group interventions have also been shown to be helpful for improving siblings’
      adjustment across various domains for a range of conditions. Short-term sibling groups
      (e.g., 5- to 8-week sessions) have been shown to improve siblings’ knowledge about
      their counterparts’ illness as well as reducing preoccupying thoughts about the health
      of their brother or sister (Spirito & Kazak, 2006). Groups have also shown to be helpful
      in reducing siblings’ internalizing symptoms of depression, anxiety, and health-related
      fears. For clinicians working with children with physical disability or chronic illness, we

=== Page 403 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 389
                                                                     
          recommend assessment of sibling adjustment and, if indicated, consider recommending
          sibling group intervention or individual counseling.       
                                                                     
                                                                     
          CONCLUSION                                                 
                                                                     
          Children with developmental, intellectual, and physical disabilities benefit from
          counseling and psychotherapy. A growing number of well-supported individual and
          family-based psychotherapeutic interventions are available to address various psycho-
          logical needs for the group of children with disabilities. Children with disabilities
                                                                     
          typically qualify for special education services and will usually receive educationally
          related services via IEPs; children are also likely to receive services within and outside of
          schools from various professionals, such as speech-language pathologists, occupational
          therapists, medical professionals, among others. Counseling and psychotherapy must
          be coordinated carefully to support therapeutic efforts of other professionals; therefore,
          consultation skills are important for the therapist. Special considerations for employing
          psychotherapy with children with disabilities include: (a) modifying therapeutic
                                                                     
          techniques to fit the child’s cognitive, language, and communication strengths and
          preferences and (b) considering the child’s functioning within a larger social-ecological
          context that includes the family, special education services, and other professionals,
          such as physicians, speech-language pathologists, and occupational therapists.
            Due to stress associated with parenting a child with disability, parents may also be
          seen for counseling and psychotherapy. Parents may benefit from counseling separate
          from their children or the entire family may be involved in a family therapy approach.
                                                                     
          Several family therapy protocols are available across different disability groups with var-
          ied therapeutic goals, such as improving communication, fostering child independence,
          or teaching family problem-solving skills. Likewise, disabilities may negatively impact
          sibling psychological adjustment; therefore, sibling interventions may be warranted.
                                                                     
                                                                     
          ANNOTATED  BIBLIOGRAPHY                                    
                                                                     
          Autism Spectrum Disorders                                  
          Organization for Autism Research                           
                                                                     
          The Organization for Autism Research is a foundation aimed at funding applied
          research and disseminating evidence-based practice information for individuals and
          families affected by autism spectrum disorders. The website provides links to free,
          downloadable guides for parents, special educators, and individuals with autism.
            http://www.researchautism.org/

=== Page 404 (1 cols) ===
390   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Autism Speaks                                                  
      AutismSpeaksprovidesfundingforbiomedicalresearch,advocacy,andpublicawareness
      about autism, and its effects on individuals,families, and society. Their website has useful
      information on autism for families and professionals.          
        http://www.autismspeaks.org/                                 
      Learning Disabilities                                          
      National Center for Learning Disabilities                      
      The National Center for Learning Disabilities (NCLD) is a foundation that aims
      to improve the lives of individuals with learning difficulties and disabilities through
      empowering parents, enabling young adults, transforming schools, and creating policy
      and advocacy impact. The vision of the NCLD is to support a society in which every
      individual possesses the academic, social, and emotional skills needed to succeed in
      school, at work, and in life.                                  
        http://www.ncld.org/                                         
      Intellectual Disability                                        
      American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities
      The American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (AAIDD)
      promotes progressive policies, research, effective practices, and universal human rights
      for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities.   
        http://aaidd.org/                                            
                                                                     
      Traumatic Brain Injury                                         
                                                                     
      Brain Injury Association of America                            
      The Brain Injury Association of America (BIAA) is a nationwide brain injury advocacy
      organization with the stated mission to advance brain injury prevention, research,
                                                                     
      treatment, and education to improve the quality of life for individuals affected by
      brain injury. The BIAA website provides age-related information regarding diagnosis,
      treatment, and outcomes for individuals and families affected by brain injury. The BIAA
      website includes recommendations for family and caregivers organized according to
      different phases of recovery, such as immediate hospitalization, rehabilitation, and
      returning home from hospitalization.                           
        http://www.biausa.org/brain-injury-children.htm              
                                                                     
      Centers for Disease Control and Prevention                     
                                                                     
      The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention maintain a website that con-
      tains updated information about prevalence, causes, and intervention guidelines for

=== Page 405 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 391
                                                                     
          individuals affected by traumatic brain injury across the lifespan. The website features
          age-specific information about causes, prevention, and intervention recommendations
                                                                     
          for infants and toddlers, youth, and adolescents.          
            http://www.cdc.gov/traumaticbraininjury/                 
                                                                     
          Physical Disabilities                                      
          Roberts, M. C., & Steele, R. G. (Eds.). (2009). Handbook of pediatric psychology (4th ed.).
                                                                     
          New York, NY: Guilford Press.                              
            The Handbook of Pediatric Psychology provides conceptual and theoretical overviews
          of working with children and families affected by various pediatric illnesses and condi-
          tions, including several highlighted in the present chapter. The handbook also features
          chapters focused on family-based intervention, school reentry, and peer-based interven-
          tions. The handbook serves as a helpful starting point for understanding unique aspects
          of various disabilities, such as spina bifida, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, burns, and trau-
                                                                     
          matic brain injury, among others.                          
                                                                     
          Society of Pediatric Psychology Evidence-Based Resources   
          The Society of Pediatric Psychology, Division 54 of the American Psychological
          Association, maintains a website with accessible fact sheets about common pediatric
                                                                     
          conditions, including several disabilities discussed in the present chapter. Fact sheets
          provide information on the prevalence, etiology, consequences, and evidence-based
          psychological assessment and treatment of various conditions.
            http://www.apadivisions.org/division-54/evidence-based/fact-sheets.aspx
                                                                     
                                                                     
          REFERENCES                                                 
                                                                     
          American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. (1998). Practice parameters for the
            assessment and treatment of children and adolescents with language and learning disorders.
            Journal of American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 37, 46S–62S.
          AmericanAcademyofChildandAdolescentPsychiatry.(1999).Summaryofthepracticeparam-
            eters for the assessment and treatment of children, adolescents, and adults with mental retar-
                                                                     
            dation and comorbid mental disorders. Journal of American Academy of Child and Adolescent
            Psychiatry, 38, 1606–1610.                               
          American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
            (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
          Anderson, S., & Morris, J. (2006). Cognitive behaviour therapy for people with Asperger
            syndrome. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 34, 293–303.
          Attwood, T. (2007). The complete guide to Asperger’s syndrome. Philadelphia, PA: Jessica
            Kingsley.

=== Page 406 (1 cols) ===
392   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Bagner, D. M., & Eyberg, S. M. (2007). Parent-child interaction therapy for disruptive behavior
        in children with mental retardation: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Clinical Child
        and Adolescent Psychology, 36, 418–429.                      
      Baker,J.(2001).Thesocialskillspicturebook:Teachingcommunication,playandemotion.Arlington,
        TX: Future Horizons.                                         
      Barnhill, G. P., Cook, K. T., Tebbenkamp, K., & Myles, B. S. (2002). The effectiveness of
        social skills intervention targeting nonverbal communication for adolescents with Asperger
        syndromeandrelatedpervasivedevelopmentaldelays.FocusonAutismandOtherDevelopmen-
        tal Disabilities, 17, 112–118.                               
      Baron-Cohen, S., Tager-Flusberg H., & Cohen D. J. (2000). Understanding other minds. Perspec-
        tives from developmental cognitive neuroscience (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University
        Press.                                                       
      Beail, N. (2005). Evidence base for behavioral interventions: Critical commentary. Mental
        Retardation, 43, 442–445.                                    
      Berkeley, S., Bender, W. N., Peaster, L. G., & Saunders, L. (2009). Implementation of response
        to intervention: A snapshot of progress. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 42, 85–95.
       Bloom,J.S.,Cohen,M.J.,&Campbell,J.M.(2006).Traumaticbraininjury.InR.W.Kamphaus
        & J. M. Campbell (Eds.), Psychodiagnostic assessment of children: Dimensional and categorical
        approaches (pp. 245–282). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.                
       Bloomquist, M. L. (2005). Skills training for children with behavior disorders, revised edition: A parent
        and practioner guidebook. New York, NY: Guilford Press.      
       Brain Injury Association of America. (2013). Brain injury in children. http://www.biausa.org/
        brain-injury-children.htm                                    
       Bregman, J. D., Zager, D., Gerdtz, J., Volkmar, F. R., Paul, R., Klin, A. et al. (2005). Behavioral
        interventions. In F. R.Volkmar, R. Paul, A. Klin, & D. Cohen (Eds.), Handbook of autism and
        pervasive developmental disorders (3rd ed., pp. 897–924). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
       Bruce, M., Collins, S., Langdon, P., Powlitch, S., & Reynolds, S. (2011). Does training improve
        understanding of core concepts in cognitive behaviour therapy by people with intellectual
        disabilities? A randomized experiment. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 49, 1–13.
      Buggey,T.(2005).Videoself-modelingapplicationswithstudentswithautismspectrumdisorders
        in a small private school setting, Focus on Autism and Other Developmental Disabilities, 20,
        52–63.                                                       
      Campbell, J. M. (2003). Efficacy of behavioral interventions for reducing problem behav-
        ior in persons with autism: A quantitative synthesis of single-subject research. Research in
        Developmental Disabilities, 24, 120–138.                     
      Celani, G., Battacchi, M. W., & Arcidiacono, L. (1999). The understanding of the emotional
        meaning of facial expressions in people with autism. Journal of Autism & Developmental
        Disorders, 29, 57–66.                                        
      Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012). Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders—
        Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, United States, 2008. Morbidity
        and mortality weekly report (Report No. 61[SS03)]). Washington, DC: Government
        Printing Office.

=== Page 407 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 393
                                                                     
          Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2013). Traumatic brain injury. Retrieved from
            http://www.cdc.gov/traumaticbraininjury/                 
          Chalfant,A.M.,Rapee,R.,&Carroll,L.(2007).Treatinganxietydisordersinchildrenwithhigh
            functioning autism spectrum disorders: A controlled trial. Journal of Autism and Developmental
                                                                     
            Disorders, 37, 1842–1857.                                
          Committee for Children. (2004). Knowledge assessment for Second Step: A violence prevention
            curriculum. Seattle, WA: Author.                         
          Compton, S. N., March, J. S., Brent, D., Albano, A. M., Weersing, R., & Curry, J. (2004).
            Cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy for anxiety and depressive disorders in children and
            adolescents: An evidence-based medicine review. Journal of the American Academy of Child
            & Adolescent Psychiatry, 43, 930–959. doi:10.1097/01.chi.0000127589.57468.bf
          Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2007). Applied behavior analysis (2nd ed.). Upper
            Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.                               
          Dekker, M. C., & Koot, H. M. (2003). DSM-IV disorders in children with borderline
            to moderate intellectual disability. I: Prevalence and impact. Journal of the American
            Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 42, 915–922. doi:10.1097/01.CHI.0000046892
            .27264                                                   
          Denckla, M. (1996). Biological correlates of learning and attention: What is relevant to learn-
            ing disability and attention hyperactivity disorder? Journal of Developmental and Behavioral
                                                                     
            Pediatrics, 17, 114–119.                                 
          Dominick, K., Davis, N. O., Lainhart, J., Tager-Flusberg, H., & Folstein, S. (2007). Atypi-
            cal behaviors in children with autism and children with a history of language impairment.
            Research in Developmental Disabilities, 28, 145–162.     
          DuPaul, G. J., Gormley, M. J., & Laracy, S. D. (2013). Comorbidity of LD and ADHD: Impli-
            cations of DSM-5 for assessment and treatment. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 46, 43–51.
            doi:10.1177/0022219412464351                             
          Einfeld, S., & Emerson, E. (2008). Intellectual disability. In M. Rutter, D. Bishop, D. Pine, S.
            Scott, J. Stevenson, E. Taylor, & A. Thapar (Eds.), Rutter’s child and adolescent psychiatry
            (5th ed., pp. 820–840). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. doi:10.1002/9781444300895
          Einfeld,S.L.,Ellis,L.A.,&Emerson,E.(2011).Comorbidityofintellectualdisabilityandmental
            disorderinchildrenandadolescents:Asystematicreview.JournalofIntellectual&Developmen-
            tal Disability, 36, 137–143.                             
          Elder,L.M.,Caterino,L.C.,Chao,J.,Shaknai,J.,&DeSimone,G.(2006).Theefficacyofsocial
                                                                     
            skills treatment for children with Asperger syndrome. Education and Treatment of Children, 29,
            635–663.                                                 
          Estes, A., Olson, E., Sullivan, K., Greenson, J., Winter, J., Dawson, G., & Munson, J.
            (2013). Parenting-related stress and psychological distress in mothers of toddlers with autism
            spectrum disorders. Brain & Development, 35(2), 133–138. doi:10.1016/j.braindev.2012.10
            .004                                                     
          Feldman, M. A., Atkinson, L., Foti-Gervais, L., & Condillac, R. (2004). Formal versus infor-
            mal interventions for challenging behavior in persons with intellectual disabilities. Journal of
            Intellectual Disability Research, 48, 60–68.

=== Page 408 (1 cols) ===
394   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Franklin, C., Biever, J., Moore, K., Clemons, D., & Scamardo, M. (2001). The effectiveness of
        solution-focused therapy with children in a school setting. Research on Social Work Practice,
        11, 411–434.                                                 
      Frith, U., & Happe, F. (1994). Autism: Beyond “theory of mind.” Cognition, 50, 115–32.
      Gray, C. (2000). Writing social stories with Carol Gray. Arlington, TX: Future Horizons.
      Groden, J., & LeVasseur, P. (1995). Cognitive picture rehearsal: A system to teach self-control.
        In K. Quill (Ed.), Teaching children with autism: Strategies to enhance communication and
        socialization (pp. 287–305). Albany, NY: Delmar.             
      Hammond,R.K.,&Hoffman,J.M.(2014).Adolescentswithhighfunctioningautism:Aninves-
        tigationofco-morbidanxietyanddepression.JournalofMentalHealthinIntellectualDisabilities,
        7, 246–263.                                                  
      Harris, S. L., & Delmolino, L. (2002). Applied behavior analysis: Its application in the treatment
        ofautismandrelateddisordersinyoungchildren.Infants&YoungChildren:AnInterdisciplinary
        Journal of Special Care Practices, 14(3), 11–17.             
      Hawley, C.A., Ward, A.B., Magnay, A. R., & Long, J. (2003). Parental stress and burden follow-
        ing traumatic brain injury amongst children and adolescents. Brain Injury, 17, 1–23.
      Haydicky, J., Wiener, J., Badali, P., Milligan, K., & Ducharme, J. M. (2012). Evaluation of a
        mindfulness-based intervention for adolescents with learning disabilities and co-occurring
        ADHD and anxiety. Mindfulness, 3, 151–164. doi:10.1007/s12671–012–0089–2
      Howlin, P. (1998). Psychological and educational treatments for autism. Journal of Child Psychol-
        ogy and Psychiatry, 39, 307–322.                             
      Hurley, A. D. (2005). Psychotherapy is an essential tool in the treatment of psychiatric disorders
        for people with mental retardation. Mental Retardation, 43, 448–450.
      Jennett, H. K., & Hagopian, L. P. (2008). Identifying empirically supported treatments
        for phobic avoidance in individuals with intellectual disabilities. Behavior Therapy, 39,
        151–161.                                                     
      Johnson, C. P., & Myers, S. M. (2007). Identification and evaluation of children with autism
        spectrum disorders. Pediatrics, 120, 1183–1215.              
      Kavale, K. A., & Forness, S. R. (1995). The nature of learning disabilities: Critical elements of diag-
        nosis and classification. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.               
      Kavale, K. A., & Mostert, M. P. (2004). Social skills interventions for individuals with learning
        disabilities. Learning Disability Quarterly, 27, 31–43.      
      Kazak, A. E., Schneider, S., & Kassam-Adams, N. (2009). Pediatric medical traumatic stress. In
        M. C. Roberts & R. G. Steele (Eds.), Handbook of pediatric psychology (4th ed., pp. 205–215).
        New York, NY: Guilford Press.                                
      Keeling, K., Myles, B. S., Gagnon, E., & Simpson, R. (2003). Using the power card strategy to
        teach sportsmanship skills to a child with autism. Focus on Autism and Other Developmental
        Disabilities, 18, 105–112.                                   
      Kendall, P. C., & Hedtke, K. A. (2006). Cognitive-behavior therapy for anxious children: Therapist
        manual (3rd ed.). Llanfair, PA: Workbook.                    
      KentuckyDepartmentofEducation(2008).Kentuckyadministrativeregulations.SpecialEducation
        Programs. KAR 707. Section 1(37).

=== Page 409 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 395
                                                                     
          Kibby, M. Y., Tyc, V. L., & Mulhern, R. K. (1998). Effectiveness of psychological intervention
            for children and adolescents with chronic medical illness: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology
            Review, 18, 103–117.                                     
          Kim, J. A., Szatmari, P., Bryson, S. E., Streiner, D. L., & Wilson, F. J. (2000). The prevalence of
            anxiety and mood problems among children with autism and Asperger syndrome. Autism, 4,
                                                                     
            117–132.                                                 
          King, R. (2005). Proceeding with compassion while awaiting the evidence: Psychotherapy and
            individuals with mental retardation. Mental Retardation, 43, 448–450.
          Koegel,R.L.,Frea,W.D.,Surratt,A.V.,Schopler,E.,&Mesibov,G.B.(1994).Self-management
            of problematic social behavior. In E. Schopler & G. B. Mesibov (Eds.), Behavioral issues in
            autism (pp. 81–97). New York, NY: Plenum Press.          
          Koskentausta, T., Iivanainen, M., & Almgvist, F. (2007). Risk factors for psychiatric disturbance
            in children with intellectual disability. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 51, 43–53.
          Krantz,P.J.,MacDuff,M.T.,&McClannahan,L.E.(1993).Programmingparticipationinfamily
            activities for children with autism: Parents’ use of photographic activity schedules. Journal of
            Applied Behavior Analysis, 26, 137–138.                  
          Laatsch,L.,Harrington,D.,Hotz,G.,Marcantuono,J.,Mozzoni,M.P.,Walsh,V.,&Hersey,K.P.
            (2007). An evidence-based review of cognitive and behavioral rehabilitation treatment stud-
            ies in children with acquired brain injury. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 22, 248–256.
          Lambie, G. W., & Milsom, A. (2010). A narrative approach to supporting students diagnosed
                                                                     
            with learning disabilities. Journal of Counseling & Development, 88, 196–203.
          Lang, R., Mahoney, R., Zein, F., Delaune, E., & Amidon, M. (2011). Evidence to practice: Treat-
            ment of anxiety in individuals with autism spectrum disorders. Neuropsychiatric Disease and
            Treatment, 7(1), 27–30.                                  
          Laurent, A. C., & Rubin, E. (2004). Emotional regulation challenges in Asperger’s Syndrome
            and high functioning autism. Topics in Language Disorders, 24, 286–297.
          Leekam, S., Tandos, J., McConachie, H., Meins, E., Parkinson, K., Wright, C., Turner, M.,
            Arnott, B., Vittorini, L., & Le Couteur, A. I. (2007). Repetitive behaviours in typically
            developing 2-year-olds. Journal of Child Psychology & Psychiatry, 48, 1131–1138.
          Leichtentritt, J., & Shechtman, Z. (2010). Children with and without learning disabilities:
            A comparison of processes and outcomes following group counseling. Journal of Learning
            Disabilities, 43, 169–179. doi:10.1177/0022219409345008  
          Lichtenstein, R. (2008). Best practices in identification of learning disabilities. In A. Thomas &
            J. Grimes (Ed.), Best practices in school psychology (5th ed., pp. 295–318). Bethesda, MD:
            NASP.                                                    
                                                                     
          Lloyd, H., & Dallos, R. (2008). First session solution-focused brief therapy with families who
            have a child with severe intellectual disabilities: Mothers’ experiences and views. Journal of
            Family Therapy, 30, 5–28.                                
          Lord, C., & McGee, J. (Eds.). (2001). Educating children with autism. Washington, DC: National
            Academy Press.                                           
          Madan-Swain, A., Katz, E. R., & LaGory, J. (2004). School and social reintegration after a seri-
            ous illness or injury. In R. T. Brown (Ed.), Handbook of pediatric psychology in school settings
            (pp. 637–655). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

=== Page 410 (1 cols) ===
396   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Mancina, C., Tankersley, M., Kamps, D., Kravits, T., & Parrett, J. (2000). Reduction of inap-
        propriate vocalizations for a child with autism using a self-management treatment program.
        Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 30, 599–606.  
      Martinez, R. S., & Semrud-Clikeman, M. (2004). Emotional adjustment and school function-
        ing of young adolescents with multiple versus single learning disabilities. Journal of Learning
        Disabilities, 37, 411–420.                                   
      Matson, J. L., Terlonge, C., & Minshawi, N. F. (2008). Children with intellectual disabilities.
        In R. J. Morris & T. R. Kratochwill (Eds.), The practice of child therapy (4th ed.). Mahwah, NJ:
        Erlbaum.                                                     
      Mattila, M., Hurtig, T., Happsamo, H., Jussila, K., Kuusikko-Gauffin, S., Kielinen, M.,
                                                          …          
        Moilanen, I. (2010). Comorbid psychiatric disorders associated with Asperger syndrome/
        high-functioning autism: A community- and clinic-based study. Journal of Autism and
        Developmental Disorders, 40, 1080–1093. doi:10.1007/s10803–010–0958–2
      Mazefsky, C. A., Conner, C. M., & Oswald, D. P. (2010). Association between depression and
        anxiety in high-functioning children with autism spectrum disorders and maternal mood
        symptoms. Autism Research, 3, 120–127. doi:10.1002/aur.133   
      McCarthy, J., & Boyd, J. (2002). Mental health services and young people with intellectual
        disability: Is it time to do better? Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 46, 250–256.
      McNamara, J., Vervaeke, S., and Willoughby, T. (2008). Learning disabilities and risk-taking
        behavior in adolescents: A comparison of those with and without comorbid Attention-
        Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 41, 561–574.
       Meltzoff, J., & Kornreich, M. (1970). Research in psychotherapy. New York, NY: Atherton.
       Mesibov, G. B., Shea, V., & Schopler, E. (2005). The TEACCH approach to autism spectrum
        disorders. New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.             
       Meyer, J. A., Mundy, P., Van Hecke, A.V., & Durocher, J. S. (2006). Social-attribution pro-
        cesses and comorbid psychiatric symptoms in children with Asperger syndrome. Autism, 10,
        383–402.                                                     
       Mink, J. W., Mandelbaum, D. E., Tuchman, R., & Rapin, I. (2006). Stereotypes and repetitive
        behaviors: Clinical assessment and brain basis. In R. Tuchman & I. Rapin (Eds.), Autism:
        A neurological disorder of early brain development (pp. 68–78). London, England: Mac Keith
        Press.                                                       
       Mishna, F., Muskat, B., & Wiener, J. (2010). I’m not lazy; it’s just that I learn differently: Devel-
        opment and implementation of a manualized school-based group for students with learning
        disabilities. Social Work with Groups, 33, 139–159.          
       Mullins, J. L., & Christian, L. (2001). The effects of progressive relaxation training on the dis-
        ruptive behavior of a boy with autism. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 22, 449–462.
       Nelson, J. M., & Harwood, H. R. (2011). A meta-analysis of parent and teacher reports
        of depression among students with learning disabilities: Evidence for the importance of
        multi-informant assessment. Psychology in the Schools, 48, 371–384. doi:10.1002/pits
       Nounopolous,A.,Ruble,L.,&Mathai,G.(2009).Behaviormanagementservicesforindividuals
        with autism in an outpatient setting. Journal of Psychological Practice, 15, 178–226.

=== Page 411 (1 cols) ===
Children and Adolescents With Disabilities 397
                                                                     
          Pinquart, M. (2013). Do the parent-child relationship and parenting behaviors differ between
            families with and without chronic illness? A meta-analysis. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 38,
            708–721.                                                 
          Pinquart,M.,&Shen,Y.(2011a).Depressivesymptomsinchildrenandadolescentswithchronic
                                                                     
            physical illness: An updated meta-analysis. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 36, 375–384.
          Pinquart, M., & Shen, Y. (2011b). Behavior problems in children and adolescents with chronic
            physical illness: A meta-analysis. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 36, 1003–1016.
          Pinquart, M., & Teubert, D. (2012). Academic, physical, and social functioning of children and
            adolescents with chronic physical illness: A meta-analysis. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 37,
            376–389.                                                 
          Plaisted, K. C. (2001). Reduced generalization in autism. An alternative to weak central coherence.
            Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.                                     
          Prout,H.T.,&Browning,B.K.(2011).Psychotherapywithpersonswithintellectualdisabilities:
            A review of effectiveness research. Advances in Mental Health and Intellectual Disabilities, 5,
            53–59.                                                   
          Reaven, J., & Hepburn, S. (2003). Cognitive-behavioral treatment of obsessive-compulsive
            disorder in a child with Asperger syndrome: A case report. Autism, 7, 145–164.
          Reynolds, W. M. (2002). Reynolds adolescent depression scale, 2nd edition (RADS-2): Professional
            manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.  
                                                                     
          Roeden, J. M., Maaskant, M. A., Bannick, F. P., & Curfs, L. M. G. (2011). Solution-focused
            brief therapy with people with mild intellectual disabilities: A case series. Journal of Policy and
            Practice in Intellectual Disabilities, 8, 247–255.       
          Ruble, L., & Mathai, G. (2010). COMPASS: Finding direction for individuals with autism
            spectrum disorders. International Public Health Journal, 2(1), 51–66.
          Ruble, L., Mathai, G., Tanguay, P., & Josephson, A. (2008). Psychosocial treatment of Asperger’s
            disorder. In J. Rausch, M. Johnson, & M. Casanova (Eds.), Asperger’s disorder (pp. 293–325).
            New York, NY: Informa Healthcare.                        
          Ruble, L., & McGrew, J. (2007). Community services outcomes in autism. Research in Autism
            Spectrum Disorders, 1, 306–372.                          
          Ruble, L., McGrew, J., & Toland, M. (2012). Goal attainment scaling as outcome measurement
            forrandomizedcontrolledtrials.JournalofAutismandDevelopmentalDisorders,42,1974–1983.
          Ruble, L. A., Willis, H., & Crabtree, V. (2008). Social skills group therapy for autism spectrum
            disorders. Journal of Clinical Case Studies, 7, 287–300. 
                                                                     
          Sharpe, D., & Rossiter, L. (2002). Siblings of children with a chronic illness: A meta-analysis.
            Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 27, 699–710.            
          Shechtman, Z., & Pastor, R. (2005). Cognitive-behavioral and humanistic group treatment
            for children with learning disabilities: A comparison of outcomes and processes. Journal of
            Counseling Psychology, 52, 322–236.                      
          Singer, G. H. S., Glang, A., Nixon, C., Cooley, E., Kerns, K. A., Williams, D., & Power, L.
            E. (1994). A comparison of two psychosocial interventions for parents of children with
            acquired brain injury: An exploratory study. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 9(4),
            38–49.

=== Page 412 (1 cols) ===
398   C                                                        
             OUNSELING AND                                           
                     P                                               
                     SYCHOTHERAPY WITH                               
                                C                                    
                                 HILDREN AND                         
                                       A                             
                                        DOLESCENTS                   
      Skull, J., & Winkler, A. M. (2011). Shifting trends in special education. Washington, DC: Thomas
        B. Fordham Institute.                                        
      Slifer, K. J., & Amari, A. (2009). Behavior management for children and adolescents with
        acquired brain injury. Developmental Disabilities and Research Reviews, 15, 144–151.
      Sofronoff, K., Attwood, T., & Hinton, S. (2005). A randomised controlled trial of a CBT inter-
        vention for anxiety in children with Asperger syndrome. Journal of Child Psychology and
        Psychiatry, 46, 1152–1160.                                   
      Spirito, A., & Kazak, A. E. (2006). Effective and emerging treatments in pediatric psychology.
        New York, NY: Oxford University Press.                       
      Stone, W. L., Ruble, L., Coonrod, E., Hepburn, S., Pennington, M., Brunette, C., & Brigham,
        N. (2010). TRIAD Social skills assessment (2nd ed.). (Available from Vanderbilt TRIAD,
        Center for Child Development, 415 Medical Center South, Nashville, TN 37232–3573, or
        www.TRIADatVanderbilt.com)                                   
      Sturmey, P. (2005). Against psychotherapy with people with mental retardation. Mental Retar-
        dation, 43, 55–57.                                           
      Tantam, D. (Ed). (1991). Asperger syndrome in adulthood. New York, NY: Cambridge University
        Press.                                                       
      U.S. Department of Education. (2004). Regulations, 300.8.c. http://idea.ed.gov/explore/view/
        p/,root,regs,300,A,300%252E8,c                               
      Volkmar, F. R., Lord, C., Bailey, A., Schultz, R. T., & Klin, A. (2004). Autism and pervasive
        developmental disorders. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 45, 135–170.
      Wade, S. L., Michaud, L., & Brown, T. M. (2006). Putting the pieces together: Preliminary effi-
        cacy ofafamilyproblem-solvingintervention forchildrenwithtraumaticbraininjury.Journal
        of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 21, 57–67.                    
      Wade, S. L., Walz, N. C., & Bosques, G. (2009). Pediatric traumatic brain injury and spinal
        cord injury. In M. C. Roberts & R. G. Steele (Eds.), Handbook of pediatric psychology (4th ed.,
        pp. 334–349). New York., NY: Guilford Press.                 
      Warschausky, S., Kewman, D., & Kay, J. (1999). Empirically supported psychological and behav-
        ioral therapies in pediatric rehabilitation of TBI. Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 14(4),
        373–383.                                                     
      Wing, L. (1997). The autistic spectrum. Lancet, 350, 1761–1766.
      Ylvisaker, M., Turkstra, L., Coehlo, C., Yorkston, K., Kennedy, M., Sohlberg, M. M., & Avery, J.
        (2007). Behavioural interventions for children and adults with behaviour disorders after TBI:
        A systematic review of the evidence. Brain Injury, 21, 769–805.

=== Page 413 (1 cols) ===
Author      Index                          
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Abramowitz,C.V., 18                                        
          Abramson,L.Y.,117                                          
          Adams,E.,137                                               
          Agaskar,V.R.,288                                           
          Akay,S., 102                                               
          Alarcón,R.D.,286,296                                       
          Albano,A.M.,128                                            
          Albee,G.W.,285                                             
          Ale,C.M., 133                                              
          Alexander, C.M.,66                                         
          Alexander, J.F.,340                                        
          Alford,B.A., 120                                           
          Alicke,M.D., 197                                           
          Allan, J.,93                                               
          Allen, J.M., 259                                           
          Allsopp,M.A., 129                                          
          Almgvist,366                                               
          Amari,A.,382                                               
          Amaya-Jackson,L., 134                                      
          Amidon,M.,361                                              
          Ammendola,E., 159                                          
          Anderson,C.M., 322                                         
          Anderson,S., 361,364                                       
          Anichkina, A.Y.,282                                        
          Appio,L.M., 79                                             
          Arambula,D.,49                                             
          Arcidiacono,L., 359                                        
          Armstrong,S.,97                                            
          Armstrong,S.A.,104                                         
          Arredondo,P., 62                                           
          Arsenio,W.F.,137                                           
          Asarnow,J.R.,126,139                                       
          Atkinson,D.R.,69                                           
          Atkinson,L., 369                                           
          Attwood,T.,364                                             
          Auerbach,R.P.,136                                          
          Austin,D.M., 263                                           
          Axline,V., 92,93,99,109                                    
          Badaly, P.,376                                             
          Baggerly, J.,97,98,104                                     
          Bagner, D.M., 368                                          
          Bailey, A.,360                                             
          Bailey, C., 340                                            
          Bailey, K.,131                                             
          Baird,M.A.,343                                             
                            Baker,J.,362,363                         
                            Baker,J.A.,300                           
                            Baker,L.,340                             
                            Baldwin,S.A.,339                         
                            Balkin,R.,97                             
                            Bandura,A.,117,163                       
                            Banks,J.A., 63                           
                            Bannink, F.P.,370                        
                            Barbarin,O.A.,78                         
                            Barley, V.,288                           
                            Barlow,D.H.,173                          
                            Barlow,S.H.,336                          
                            Barnhill, G.P.,362                       
                            Baron-Cohen, S.,360                      
                            Barrett,C. L.,16                         
                            Barrett,P.M., 128                        
                            Bartley, W.W.,159                        
                            Barton,C.,340                            
                            Baruth,L.G.,189–190                      
                            Basco,M.R.,115,120                       
                            Baskin,E., 258,264                       
                            Bassin,A.,253                            
                            Bateson,G.,280                           
                            Battachi,M. W.,359                       
                            Bavolek,S. J.,336                        
                            Beail,N.,369                             
                            Beal,D., 180                             
                            Bean,J.S., 259                           
                            Beck,A.T.,115,118,119,120,125,           
                             142,155,163                             
                            Beck,J.S., 115                           
                            Belloiu,A.,171                           
                            Bender,W.N., 372                         
                            Bennett,M., 131                          
                            Bensaheb, A.,133                         
                            Berg,I.K.,281,282,287,300,301            
                            Bergin,A.E., 15                          
                            Berkeley, S.,372                         
                            Berliner, L.,140                         
                            Berman,J.S.,19,181                       
                            Bernal,M., 264                           
                            Bernal,M.E., 69                          
                            Bernard,M.E.,155,170,181,182,            
                             183,186,187,191,192,194,197             
                            Bernstein, G.A.,134                      
                            Berry,J.,67                              
                                              Berry, J.W.,68,80      
                                              Bersoff,D. N.,32,43,44,50
                                              Bertolino, B.,281,306  
                                              Bezonsky, R.,126       
                                              Biever, J.,306,374–375 
                                              Bigelow, G.,258        
                                              Birdsall, B.,44        
                                              Blackard,S., 93        
                                              Blanchard, E. B.,117   
                                              Blanco, P.,106         
                                              Blaske,D. M.,341       
                                              Blissett,J.,125,181    
                                              Block,M.A.,260         
                                              Bloom,J.S.,377,378,379 
                                              Bloomquist,M. L.,361,364
                                              Bluestone-Miller, R.,301
                                              Bodine,R.,253          
                                              Bogels,S. M.,196       
                                              Bolton-Oetzel,K.B.,288 
                                              Bora,C., 187           
                                              Borda,C.,329           
                                              Borduin,C.M., 13,341   
                                              Borum,R.,41            
                                              Boscolo,L.,331         
                                              Bosques,G.,377         
                                              Bower,E.M., 4          
                                              Boxer,P.,137           
                                              Boyd,J.,367            
                                              Boyd,J.D.,171          
                                              Bozarth,J.D.,96        
                                              Bozeman, B.N., 305     
                                              Bratter,T.,253         
                                              Bratton,103            
                                              Bratton,S., xi,91,93,97–98,99,
                                               102,103,104,105,106,109
                                              Bratton,S.C., 106      
                                              Bray, J.H.,50          
                                              Brechman-Toussaint, M.,132
                                              Bregman, J.D.,363      
                                              Brehm, K.,300          
                                              Brody,C.W.,341         
                                              Brondino,M.J., 341     
                                              Brooks,R.B.,301        
                                              Brown,H.,341           
                                              Brown,J.,21            
                                              Brown,T.M., 382        
                                   399

=== Page 414 (1 cols) ===
400   A                                                        
             UTHOR                                                   
                I                                                    
                 NDEX                                                
      Brown-Chidsey, R.,53                                           
      Browning, B.K.,367,368,370                                     
      Bruce,M., 368                                                  
      Bryson,S. E.,360                                               
      Buggey, T.,363                                                 
      Bujoreanu,S., 190                                              
      Burgess,P.M.,166                                               
      Burlingame, G.M.,21                                            
      Burrows-Horton,C.,303                                          
      Butler,A.C., 142                                               
      Calin, A., 190,198                                             
      Campbell, J.,xi                                                
      Campbell, J.M., 357,361,377                                    
      Campbell, L.F.,192                                             
      Campione-Barr, N.,7                                            
      Canino, I.A.,70                                                
      Canter, A.,50                                                  
      Card,N.A.,137                                                  
      Carlson, C.,303                                                
      Carlson, C.I.,303,304                                          
      Carlson, G.A.,126                                              
      Carnes, P.,337                                                 
      Carroll, L.,359                                                
      Casas, J.M., 66                                                
      Caselli, G.,159                                                
      Casey, R.J.,19,181                                             
      Caterino, L.C., 362                                            
      Cauffman, E., 41                                               
      Ceballos, P.,103,106                                           
      Cecchin, G.,331                                                
      Celani, G.,359                                                 
      Chae, M.H.,68                                                  
      Chalfant, A.M.,359                                             
      Chamberlain, P.,341                                            
      Chao, J.,362                                                   
      Chapman, J.E., 142                                             
      Chard, K.,xi,115,134                                           
      Chard, K.M., 144                                               
      Chavira, D.A.,131                                              
      Cheshire, A.,338                                               
      Choate-Summers, M.L., 130                                      
      Chorpita, B.F.,128                                             
      Choudhury, M.S., 125,143                                       
      Christian, L.,363                                              
      Christian, M.D.,78                                             
      Christianson, S.L.,303                                         
      Christopherson, E.R.,20                                        
      Clark, D.M.,131                                                
      Clark, L.,190                                                  
      Clark, M.D.,306                                                
      Clarke, 142                                                    
      Claud,D., 21                                                   
      Clemons, D.,306,374–375                                        
      Cnaan, R.A.,73                                                 
      Coats,K.,260                                                   
      Coatsworth,J.D.,340                                            
      Cohen, D.J.,360                                                
                         Cohen, J.,19,98                             
                         Cohen, J.A.,134,140                         
                         Cohen, M.J.,377                             
                         Collins, S.,368                             
                         Compton,S.N.,376                            
                         Comstack,C.,336                             
                         Condillac, R.,369                           
                         Conner, C.M., 360                           
                         Conoley, C.W.,298                           
                         Conrad,M.M., 81                             
                         Cook,K.T.,362                               
                         Cooper,J.O.,361                             
                         Copeland-Linder, N., 73                     
                         Corcoran,J.,298,305                         
                         Corey, G.,298                               
                         Cornelius-White, J.,96                      
                         Cowen,E., 4                                 
                         Cox,J.W.,21                                 
                         Crabtree,V., 362                            
                         Crawford,D.,253                             
                         Crick,N.R.,137                              
                         Cross,W.E.,68                               
                         Crowley, M.,125                             
                         Crowley, S.L.,142                           
                         Cubberley, W.,258                           
                         Cummings, J.,26                             
                         Cunningham, P.,341                          
                         Curfs,L.M.G.,370                            
                         Curtis,N.M.,13                              
                         Dadds,M.R.,128,188                          
                         Dakof,G.,342                                
                         Dallos,R.,306,370                           
                         Danger, S., 106                             
                         Dare,C., 340                                
                         Darwin, C.,161                              
                         David,D., 159,163,171,173,184,              
                          188,190,198,199                            
                         David,O.A.,xi,155,173,184,188,              
                          198                                        
                         Davis,D., 163                               
                         Davis,M.W.,298                              
                         Davis,N.O.,360                              
                         Davison,G.C., 192,194                       
                         Deblinger, E., 140                          
                         DeJong,P.,287,297,306                       
                         Dekker,M.C., 366,369                        
                         DeKraai, M.,49                              
                         Delaune, E., 361                            
                         Delmolino, L.,359                           
                         DeMartino, R.A., 19                         
                         DeMers, S.T.,49                             
                         Denckla, M., 360                            
                         Derks,J.,282                                
                         DeRubeis,R.J.,136                           
                         Desetta,A., 296                             
                         deShazer, S., 281,282,287,290,              
                          291,294,297,304,326,333                    
                                           DeSimone, G.,362          
                                           Devries,R.,157            
                                           DeWit,D.J.,131            
                                           Deyhle, D., 80            
                                           Diamond,G.M.,342          
                                           Diamond,G.S.,342          
                                           Diekstra,R.F.W.,192,193   
                                           DiGiuseppe,R.,xi,155,156,159,
                                            162,163,164,167,173,174,175,
                                            178,179,180,181,182,183,184,
                                            186,187,188,189,190,191,192,
                                            193                      
                                           Dillman Taylor,D., 102    
                                           Dix,T.,188                
                                           Dobson,K.S.,118           
                                           Dodge,K.A.,4,5,137        
                                           Doherty, W.J.,343         
                                           Dolan,Y.,282              
                                           Dolan,Y.M.,282            
                                           Dolgin, K.G.,7            
                                           Doll,B.,4,26,300          
                                           Dollard,J.,117            
                                           Dominick,K.,360           
                                           Donovan,C., 132           
                                           Doss,A.J.,18              
                                           Dowd,E.T.,119             
                                           Dowling,E., 326           
                                           Doyle,K.A.,187            
                                           Dozois,D. J.,25           
                                           Dozois,D.J.A.,118         
                                           Drasgow,E.,54             
                                           Dreikurs,R.,233           
                                           Drewes,A.,91,93           
                                           Dryden,W.,155,156,163,173,178
                                           Dubow,E. F.,137           
                                           Ducharme,J.M., 376        
                                           Duchoslav, R.,125         
                                           Duffy, A.L., 128          
                                           Duncan, B.,21             
                                           Duncan, B.L.,285,294      
                                           Dunne, A.,288             
                                           DuPaul,G.J.,372           
                                           Durand,H.,198             
                                           Durocher,J.S.,364         
                                           Dym,B.,333                
                                           D’Zurilla,T.J.,155,181    
                                           Edwards,N.,93             
                                           Egan, G.,289              
                                           Einfeld, S.L.,366,367     
                                           Eisler,I., 340            
                                           Elder,L.M., 362           
                                           Elliot,S.N.,50            
                                           Ellis,184                 
                                           Ellis,A.,117,155,156,157,159,
                                            162,163,165,169,170,173,174,
                                            178,181                  
                                           Ellis,D.A., 341

=== Page 415 (1 cols) ===
Author Index 401   
                                                                     
          Ellis, L.A.,366,367                                        
          Emerson,E., 366,367                                        
          Emmelkamp,P.M., 196                                        
          Engel, G.,328                                              
          Engels, G.I.,192,193                                       
          English, J.,257                                            
          Englund, S.,253                                            
          Epston,D.,326                                              
          Erwin,J.C., 253                                            
          Esposito,M.A., 192,193                                     
          Estes,A.,364                                               
          Everall, R.D., 288                                         
          Eyberg,S. M.,368                                           
          Eysenck, H.J.,14,17                                        
          Farrell,W.,198,254                                         
          Fauber,R.L., 119                                           
          Fedewa,A.,287                                              
          Fedewa,A.L., ix,1,25                                       
          Feeny, N.C.,132,135                                        
          Feldman,M.A.,369                                           
          Field,A.P.,119                                             
          Field,C.,125                                               
          Fine,M.E., 338                                             
          Fisch,R.,280,323                                           
          Fischer, A.R.,79                                           
          Fischer, L.,43,45,48,52,54                                 
          Fisher,B.L., 336                                           
          Fishman, H.C., 329                                         
          Fiske,S.T.,283                                             
          FitzGerald,D.P.,137                                        
          Flahive,M. W.,104                                          
          Flanagan, D.P., 40                                         
          Fleuridas,C.,331                                           
          Flynn, M.,81                                               
          Folstein,S., 360                                           
          Ford,E., 253                                               
          Ford,L., 54                                                
          Ford,P.W.,192,193                                          
          Forman,E.M.,142                                            
          Forness,S.R.,372–373                                       
          Forrester,L.,129                                           
          Foti-Gervais,L., 369                                       
          Franco,N.,133                                              
          Frank,J.B., 286,296                                        
          Franklin,C.,282,283,298,302,305,                           
           306,374–375                                               
          Frea,W.D., 363                                             
          Freake,H.,288                                              
          Freeman,A., 163                                            
          Freeman,J.,326                                             
          Freud,S., 2                                                
          Frey,M.A., 341                                             
          Friedman,A.S.,341                                          
          Friedman,M.S., 74                                          
          Friedman,R.,338                                            
          Frith,U.,360                                               
          Froeschle,J.,298,306                                       
                            Fuller,G.B.,xi,217                       
                            Funk,R.R.,288                            
                            Gagnon,E., 363                           
                            Galloway,193                             
                            Garcia,J.I.R.,81                         
                            Garfield,S. L.,15                        
                            Garnefski,N.,192,193                     
                            Garner,B.R.,288                          
                            Garrett,M.T.,79,80                       
                            Garza,Y.,106                             
                            Gassman,D., 286                          
                            Gavita,O.A., 173,190,198                 
                            Gelles,R.J.,73                           
                            George,J.C., 45,48                       
                            Gergen,K.,281                            
                            Gil,E.,91,94,334,335                     
                            Gilgun,J.F.,79                           
                            Gillaspy, A.,294                         
                            Gilliland, B.,224                        
                            Gilman,R.,xi,115,134                     
                            Gingerich, W.J.,282,290,305              
                            Ginott,H.G.,92,103                       
                            Ginsburg,G.S., 135,139,140               
                            Glass,G.V., 18,19,192                    
                            Glasser,N.,218,219,253                   
                            Glasser,W.,217,218,219,220,223,          
                             224,226,236,242,245,251,252,            
                             254,265                                 
                            Glossoff,H.L., 37                        
                            Godley,S.H.,288                          
                            Gold,J.,137                              
                            Goldenberg,H.,318                        
                            Goldenberg,I.,318                        
                            Goldman,E.B.,43,45,48                    
                            Goldner,V.,322                           
                            Goldstein,S.,301                         
                            Gonzales,T.,106                          
                            Gonzalez,193,196                         
                            Gonzalez,S.,337                          
                            Good,P.,253                              
                            Goodrich,T.J., 322                       
                            Gordon,E.A.,119                          
                            Gorman,B.S.,139                          
                            Gormley,M.J.,372                         
                            Gorter-Cass,S.E.,259                     
                            Gossen,P.,253                            
                            Gossette,R.L.,192,194,197                
                            Goto,S.,81                               
                            Gotterbarn,R.C.,180                      
                            Gottlieb,M.C., 31                        
                            Grant,F.,256                             
                            Grant,S.,300                             
                            Grave,J., 125,181                        
                            Graves,D., 198                           
                            Grawe,K.,286                             
                            Gray,C., 362,363                         
                            Greenbaum,P.,342                         
                                              Greene, A.F.,40        
                                              Griger, R.M., 171      
                                              Grisso,T.,49,50        
                                              Groden,J.,363          
                                              Grunwald,B.,233        
                                              Guerney, B.,Jr., 93    
                                              Guerney, L., 92,93,103,105
                                              Guerra,N.G.,138        
                                              Gunn, W.B.,Jr.,xi,317  
                                              Gurman,A.S., 339,340   
                                              Guthrie,D., 134        
                                              Gutkin,193             
                                              Gutkin,T.B., 50        
                                              Haaga, D.A.,192,194    
                                              Hagen, K.A.,341        
                                              Hagopian, L.P.,369     
                                              Hajzler, D.J.,192,194  
                                              Hale, J.V., 263        
                                              Haley, J.,xi,280,317,320,330
                                              Halliday-Boykins, C.A., 341
                                              Hambidge,G., 92        
                                              Hammond,R.,xi          
                                              Hammond,R.K.,357,360   
                                              Hampe,I.E.,16          
                                              Hanley, J.H., 341      
                                              Hansen, C., 133        
                                              Hansen, J.,192,195     
                                              Hansen, N.,40          
                                              Hanson, M.J.,63        
                                              Hansson, K.,341        
                                              Happe,F.,360           
                                              Hardiman, R.,69        
                                              Hare-Mustin, R.T.,322  
                                              Harmell, P.H.,46,47,52 
                                              Harris,A.,54           
                                              Harris,M.A.,260        
                                              Harris,M.B.,302        
                                              Harris,S.L., 359       
                                              Hart-Hester,S., 258    
                                              Hartshorne,T.,26,28,32,34,35,36,
                                               38,39,40,41,44,47,49,50,51,
                                               53,54                 
                                              Hartzell, M.,105       
                                              Harvey, R.G.,332       
                                              Harvey, V.,262         
                                              Harwood,H.R.,372       
                                              Hashemi, A.,126        
                                              Hawes,R.M.,255         
                                              Hawley, C.A.,381       
                                              Hawley, K.M., 18       
                                              Haydicky, J.,376       
                                              Hayes, S.,192,195      
                                              Hayes, S.C.,115,173    
                                              Haynes, K.N., 171      
                                              Hays,J.R.,50           
                                              Hays,P.A.,40,322       
                                              Heath, N.,119

=== Page 416 (1 cols) ===
402   A                                                        
             UTHOR                                                   
                I                                                    
                 NDEX                                                
      Hedtke,K.A., 376                                               
      Hefner, K.,296                                                 
      Heiblum,N.,341                                                 
      Heider, F.,117                                                 
      Heimberg, R.G.,119                                             
      Helker, W.,106                                                 
      Helms,J.E., 69                                                 
      Henderson, C.,342                                              
      Hendrick, S.,282                                               
      Henggeler, S.S., 13                                            
      Henggeler, S.W.,341                                            
      Hepburn,S.,362,364                                             
      Herlihy, B.,35,44                                              
      Hernandez, B.,81                                               
      Hernández, P.,323                                              
      Heron,T.E.,361                                                 
      Hervis,O.,340                                                  
      Hess,R.,258,264                                                
      Heward,W.L., 361                                               
      Hickman, J.,303                                                
      Hildebrand,M., 196–197                                         
      Hill, R.B.,78                                                  
      Hinton, S.,364                                                 
      Hirsch, C.R.,131                                               
      Hoffman, J.M., 360                                             
      Hogg,V., 282                                                   
      Hoglund,R.,253                                                 
      Holland, L.,125                                                
      Holleb,L., 134                                                 
      Holliman, R.,106                                               
      Holt,P.,338                                                    
      Hoopes,M.H.,336,337                                            
      Hopson,L.,298,306                                              
      Hough-Waite,L., 257                                            
      Howlon,P.,360                                                  
      Huang, L.,4,5                                                  
      Huber,C.H.,189–190                                             
      Hubert,M.,44                                                   
      Hudson,J.L., 128                                               
      Huesmann, L.R.,137                                             
      Huey, W.C.,35,36,55                                            
      Hug-Hellmuth, H.,92                                            
      Hulteng, R.J.,43,45,48                                         
      Hunter, M.L.,255                                               
      Hurley, A.D.,368,369                                           
      Hwang, W.C.,81                                                 
      Idalski,A.,341                                                 
      Iivanainen, 366                                                
      Imber,S., 257                                                  
      Imber-Black,E., 331,332                                        
      Inch, R.,306                                                   
      Inoff-Germain, G.,129                                          
      Ionutiu,D.R.,190                                               
      Isaacs,L., 342                                                 
      Isaacs,M.L., 37                                                
      Isebaert,L., 282                                               
      Ivery, J.,305                                                  
                         Ivey,A.E., 66                               
                         Ivey,M.B., 66                               
                         Jackson,D.,253                              
                         Jackson,M.L., 82                            
                         Jacob,S.,26,28,32,34,35,36,38,              
                          39,40,41,44,47,49,50,51,53,                
                          54                                         
                         Jacobs,R.H., 136                            
                         Jacobson,N.,173                             
                         Jacob-Timm,S.,54                            
                         Jagim,R.D.,43                               
                         James,R.,224                                
                         James,W.,116,164                            
                         Jayne, K.,91,97                             
                         Jenkins, O.B., 63                           
                         Jennett, H.K.,369                           
                         Jilton,R.,182                               
                         Johnson,B., 4,157                           
                         Johnson,C.P., 359                           
                         Johnson,J.H.,34,37,38,39                    
                         Johnson,K.,119                              
                         Johnson,L.M., 328                           
                         Johnson,S.P., 104                           
                         Johnson,W.,156                              
                         Jonas,L.,91                                 
                         Jones,A.C.,79                               
                         Jones,J.,xi,61                              
                         Jones,J.M.,64,66,69,70,71,75,               
                          78,79,81                                   
                         Jorm,A.F.,192,194                           
                         Josephson,A.,364                            
                         Joyce,198                                   
                         Joyce,M., 181,183,187,190                   
                         Kamps,D., 363                               
                         Kapche,R.,54                                
                         Karver,M.S.,288                             
                         Kaslow,N.J.,127,192                         
                         Kassam-Adams,N.,380                         
                         Kassinove,184                               
                         Kassinove,H.,139,198                        
                         Katz,E. R.,380                              
                         Kavale,K.A., 372–373,375                    
                         Kay,J.,381                                  
                         Kazak,A.E., 380,386,387,388                 
                         Kazdin,A.E.,3,4,12,20,125,188,              
                          197                                        
                         Kearney, C.A.,133                           
                         Keat,D.B.,12                                
                         Keeling, K.,363                             
                         Keeney, B.,324                              
                         Keith-Spiegel, P.C., 33,34,35,36,           
                          39                                         
                         Kellam,T.,93                                
                         Kelly, G.,158                               
                         Kelly, G.A., 117                            
                         Kelly, M.S.,301,306                         
                                           Kelter,J.,187,188,189     
                                           Kendall,P.C., 115,125,127,128,
                                            139,142,143,171,376      
                                           Kennard,B.D.,135          
                                           Kent,G.,288               
                                           Kerzbeck,U., 296          
                                           Kewman,D.,381             
                                           Kibby,M.Y.,386            
                                           Killian,K.,322            
                                           Kim,J.,68                 
                                           Kim,J.A.,360,363          
                                           Kim,J.S., 305,306         
                                           Kim,U.,68                 
                                           King,N.J.,134             
                                           King,R.,368               
                                           Kitano,H.H.L., 68         
                                           Klein,M., 2,92            
                                           Klein,N.C.,340            
                                           Klin,A.,360               
                                           Klotz,M.L., 197           
                                           Knapp,S., 50              
                                           Knaus,W.,186              
                                           Knell,S., 93              
                                           Knight,G.P.,69            
                                           Kniskern,D.P.,339,340     
                                           Koegel,R.L., 363          
                                           Koeske,G.F.,74            
                                           Koocher,G.P., 33,34,35,36,39
                                           Koot,H.M., 366,369        
                                           Kopec,A.M.,180            
                                           Kornreich,M.,367          
                                           Korr,W.S., 74             
                                           Koskentausta,366          
                                           Kottman,T.,93             
                                           Kovacs,M.,143             
                                           Krantz,P.J.,363           
                                           Kravits,T.,363            
                                           Krebs,P.M.,174            
                                           Kuhn,T.,163               
                                           Kunze,K.S.,260            
                                           Kurasaki,R.,170           
                                           Laatsch, L.,382           
                                           Labarrie,T.L., 79         
                                           Lacourt,M.,282            
                                           LaFavor,T.,13             
                                           LaGory,J.,380             
                                           Lainhart, J.,360          
                                           Lambert,M.J.,15,21,294    
                                           Lambert,S.,91,109         
                                           Lambie,G.W.,373           
                                           Landreth, G.,91,92,93,97–98,
                                            99,101,103,104,105,106,107,
                                            109                      
                                           Lang, R.,361,362          
                                           Langdon, P.,368           
                                           Langley, A.K.,129         
                                           Laracy, S.D., 372

=== Page 417 (1 cols) ===
Author Index 403   
                                                                     
          Larres,C., 68                                              
          Lasts,C.G.,133                                             
          Laurent,A.C., 361                                          
          Lavy, E.H.,196–197                                         
          Lawson,D., 290                                             
          Lazarus,A.,117                                             
          Lazarus,A.A.,12                                            
          Lazarus,R.S., 171                                          
          Leaf, R.,174                                               
          Leahy, R.L., 117                                           
          Lee, A.C., 92                                              
          Lee, K.,106                                                
          Lee, L.,279                                                
          Lee, M.Y.,282,306                                          
          Leekam,S., 359                                             
          Leibert,T.W.,288                                           
          Leichtentritt, J.,373                                      
          Leitch, R.,288                                             
          Leong, F.T.L., 79                                          
          Lerner, J.S.,119                                           
          Letourneau,E., 341                                         
          LeVasseur, P., 363                                         
          Leve,L.D., 341                                             
          Levitt,E.E., 16,17                                         
          Levitt,T.,279                                              
          Levy, D.,92                                                
          Lewis,R.L.,73                                              
          Lewis,V.E., 261                                            
          Lichtenstein, R.,372                                       
          Liddle,H.,342                                              
          Liddle,H.A.,341                                            
          Lin, Y.,97–98                                              
          Lindquist,B.,338                                           
          Linehan, M.M.,115                                          
          Linssen, F.,296                                            
          Lipchik, E.,282,304                                        
          Lipps,C.,196                                               
          Liscio,M., 301                                             
          Litrell, J.M., 281                                         
          Little, T.D.,137                                           
          Litwack,L., 220,253                                        
          Lloyd,H.,306,370                                           
          Lobovitz,D., 326                                           
          Lochman, J.E.,137                                          
          Lombard,T.J.,51                                            
          Long, J.,322,381                                           
          Lord,B.D., 263                                             
          Lord,C.,360,361,363                                        
          Lovejoy, M.C.,190                                          
          Lundahl, B.,190                                            
          Lynch, C.,298                                              
          Lynch, E.W.,63                                             
          Lynn, S., 159                                              
          Lyons, L.C.,192,194,197                                    
          Maaskant, M.A.,370                                         
          MacDonald, A.J.,305                                        
          MacDuff, M.T.,363                                          
                            MacKune-Karrer,B., 322                   
                            MacLean, G.,92                           
                            Madanes,C., 331                          
                            Madan-Swain, A.,380,381                  
                            Magnay, A.R.,381                         
                            MaguthNezu,C., 155,181                   
                            Mahoney, M., 159,192,194                 
                            Mahoney, M.J.,118                        
                            Mahoney, R.,361                          
                            Malley, P.,41                            
                            Manassis,K.,141,142                      
                            Mancina, C., 363                         
                            Mancini, C., 131                         
                            Mandelbaum,D.E., 359                     
                            Mannarino, A.P.,140                      
                            Marandola,P., 257                        
                            Marcek,J.,322                            
                            Marner, T.,326                           
                            Martin,P.P., 73                          
                            Martinez,R.S.,374                        
                            Martucci,L., 255                         
                            Mash,E.J.,25                             
                            Mathai, G.,359,361,364                   
                            Matson,J.L.,367,369                      
                            Matthews,D.B.,255                        
                            Mattila,M., 360                          
                            Maultsby,M.C., 163                       
                            Mazefsky, C.A.,360                       
                            McBride,C.K.,340                         
                            McCarthy, J.,367                         
                            McCarthy, M., 192,195                    
                            McCarty, M.A.,142                        
                            McClannahan, L.E.,363                    
                            McCollum,E.E., 282                       
                            McDavis,R.,62                            
                            McDowell,N.K.,119                        
                            McDowell,T.,323                          
                            McGee,J.,361,363                         
                            McGeeBanks,C.A.,63                       
                            McGoldrick,M.,321                        
                            McGovern,T.,192,195                      
                            McGovern,T.E., 192,195,196               
                            McGrew,J.,359,364                        
                            McGuiness,T.,250                         
                            McGuire,C.V.,283                         
                            McGuire,W.J.,283                         
                            McHale,S. M.,73                          
                            McHugh,T.A., 188                         
                            McKeel,J.,305                            
                            McLaughlin, K.A.,139                     
                            McLeod,B.D.,139,288                      
                            McMahon, J.,195,197                      
                            McNamara,J.,372,374                      
                            Meadows,S., 125                          
                            Mearns,D., 96                            
                            Meichenbaum, D., 155,163,181,            
                             184                                     
                            Meichenbaum, D.H.,117                    
                                              Melfsen, S., 133       
                                              Melton, G.B.,341       
                                              Meltzoff, J.,367       
                                              Merriefield, C.,184    
                                              Merriefield, R.,184    
                                              Mersch, P.P.,196–197   
                                              Mesibov,G.B., 359,363  
                                              Metcalf, L., 282,298,300,302
                                              Metzger, A.,7          
                                              Meyer, C., 46          
                                              Meyer, J.A.,364        
                                              Meyer, R.S.,54         
                                              Michael, K.D., 142     
                                              Michaud, L.,382        
                                              Miller, L., 16         
                                              Miller, N.E., 117      
                                              Miller, N.J.,192,193,198
                                              Miller, S., 21,192,195 
                                              Miller, S.A., 125      
                                              Miller, S.D., 288      
                                              Miller, V.A.,132       
                                              Miller, W.,182         
                                              Milligan, K.,376       
                                              Mills, M.J.,48         
                                              Milson, A.,373         
                                              Minde, K.,126,128      
                                              Minde, T.,68           
                                              Mink, J.W.,359         
                                              Minshawi, N.F.,367     
                                              Mintz, J.,139          
                                              Minuchin, S.,320,321,329,
                                               340                   
                                              Mireas, R.,306         
                                              Mishna, F.,374,375     
                                              Miville, M.L., 69      
                                              Mok,D., 68             
                                              Molnar, A.E.,338       
                                              Monga, S.,129          
                                              Montesi, J.L., 119     
                                              Moon,M., 262           
                                              Moore,K.,298,306,374–375
                                              Moore,P.,139           
                                              Moreau,D., 66          
                                              Morlock,L., 300        
                                              Morris,A.S.,7          
                                              Morris,J.,361,364      
                                              Morris,T.L., 133       
                                              Morrison,M., 105,106   
                                              Morten, G.,69          
                                              Moseley, S., 181       
                                              Mostert,M.P.,372,375   
                                              Moustakas,C.,92        
                                              Mufson,L., 66,67,71,77,78
                                              Mulhern, R.K.,386      
                                              Mullins, J.L.,363      
                                              Mulvey, E.P.,41        
                                              Mundy, P.,364          
                                              Muris,P.,119

=== Page 418 (1 cols) ===
404   A                                                        
             UTHOR                                                   
                I                                                    
                 NDEX                                                
      Murphy, J.J.,xii,279,281,282,285,                              
        286,287,290,294,298,299,300,                                 
        306                                                          
      Murphy, L.,254                                                 
      Muskat,B.,374                                                  
      Myers, L.,253                                                  
      Myers, S.M.,359                                                
      Myles, B.S.,362,363                                            
      Naar-King, S.,341                                              
      Nassar-McMillan, S., 82                                        
      Neenan, M., 163,178                                            
      Neimeyer, R.,159                                               
      Nelson, 193                                                    
      Nelson, J.M., 372                                              
      Nelson, T.,305                                                 
      Nelson, T.S.,331                                               
      Ness,M.E., 290                                                 
      Newsome,S.,306                                                 
      Nezu,A.M.,155,181                                              
      Ngo,V,135                                                      
      Nielsen, S., 156                                               
      Noll,J.O.,43                                                   
      Norcross,J.C., 174,181,192,282                                 
      North,J.,264                                                   
      Northey, W.F.,340,342                                          
      Nounopolous,A.,361                                             
      Nuffield,E.J.,4                                                
      Nunnally, E.,282                                               
      Nylund,D., 326                                                 
      Oakland, T.,63                                                 
      Oaklander, V.,93                                               
      Obasi,E.M., 79                                                 
      O’Brien,R.M.,192,194,197                                       
      Ochoa, S.H.,40                                                 
      O’Connor, K.,93                                                
      Oei,T.P.S.,192,195,197                                         
      Offord,D.R.,131                                                
      Ogborne,A.,131                                                 
      Ogden, T.,341                                                  
      O’Hanlon, W.H.,281,326                                         
      Ojiambo,D., 104,106                                            
      Olson,K.,322                                                   
      Olsson,M., 341                                                 
      Omizo,M.,258                                                   
      Orlinsky, D.E., 282                                            
      Ortiz,S.O.,40                                                  
      Oswald,D.P.,360                                                
      Owens,M., 129                                                  
      Ozabaci, N.,139                                                
      Packman, J.,104,106                                            
      Pacquiao, D.F.,81                                              
      Pakaslahti, L., 137                                            
      Panayotov, P.A.,282                                            
      Paniagua, F.A.,65,76,80                                        
                         Parrett,J.,363                              
                         Parsons,B.,340                              
                         Parsons,B.V.,340                            
                         Passaro,P.D., 262                           
                         Pastor,R.,376                               
                         Pate,R.H.,37                                
                         Patterson,G.R.,341                          
                         Paul,G.L., 339                              
                         Paulson,B.L., 288                           
                         Pearlman, S.F.,322                          
                         Peaster, L.G.,372                           
                         Pedersen, P.B.,66                           
                         Pepitone-Arreola-Rockwell,F.,40             
                         Pepper,R.,233                               
                         Perry, B.,91,105                            
                         Peterson,D., 157                            
                         Peterson,S., 328                            
                         Peterson,T.R.,341                           
                         Petra,J.R.,261                              
                         Pettorini, D.,157                           
                         Piacentini, J.,129                          
                         Piacentini, J.C.,139                        
                         Piaget, J.,168,181,335                      
                         Pianta, R.C., 300                           
                         Pichette, E.F.,80                           
                         Pinderhughes, E. B.,322                     
                         Pinquart,M., 385                            
                         Pinsof, W.,339                              
                         Plaisted, K.C., 360                         
                         Poland,S., 41,42                            
                         Polder,S.K.,192,195                         
                         PollackDorta,K.,66                          
                         Ponterotto,J.G.,66                          
                         Pope,L.K.,171                               
                         Poppen,W.,257                               
                         Popper,K.,159                               
                         Post,M.,306                                 
                         Powell,N.R.,137                             
                         Powlitch,S., 368                            
                         Prata,G.,331                                
                         Prochaska,J.O.,174                          
                         Prout,H.T.,ix,1,19,25,287,367,              
                          368,370                                    
                         Prout,S.M.,xii,25                           
                         Prouty,A.,xii                               
                         Prouty,A.M.,317,322,323                     
                         Purswall,K.,91                              
                         Quinn,B., 256                               
                         Rachin, R.,253                              
                         Radtke,L., 254                              
                         Randall,J.,13                               
                         Randolph,D., 256                            
                         Rapee,R.,359                                
                         Rapee,R.M., 128,131                         
                         Rapin,I.,359                                
                         Rapoport,J.L., 129                          
                                           Rappaport,J.L., 137       
                                           Rappen,U., 92             
                                           Rasbury,W.C., 34          
                                           Rathus,S.A., 335          
                                           Ray,D., 91,93,95,97,98,99,103,
                                            104,106                  
                                           Rayner,R.,117             
                                           Reaven,J.,362,364         
                                           Reese,R.J.,19             
                                           Reid,J.,341               
                                           Reid,J.B.,341             
                                           Reinecke,M.A.,136         
                                           Reis,B.F.,342             
                                           Reiss,D., 337             
                                           Reiter,M.,329             
                                           Remley,T.B.,35            
                                           Repp,A.C.,54              
                                           Reschly, D.J.,32          
                                           Resick,P.A.,134           
                                           Retter,K.,262             
                                           Reynolds,C.R.,50          
                                           Reynolds,S.,368           
                                           Reynolds,W.M.,127,366     
                                           Rhine,T.,91               
                                           Rhodes,R.L., 40           
                                           Ricard,R.,298             
                                           Richardson,T.,136         
                                           Ridley,C., 157            
                                           Ridley,C.R.,157           
                                           Rieckmann,T.R.,80         
                                           Risser,H.J.,190           
                                           Ritter,B., 117            
                                           Rivers,I.,74              
                                           Robert,M.,253             
                                           Roberts,E.,119            
                                           Roberts,J.,331            
                                           Robertson,J.,xii,317      
                                           Robin,M., 156             
                                           Rochat,P.,125             
                                           Rockymore,M.,79           
                                           Roeden,J.M., 370          
                                           Rogers,C., 91,92,93,94,95,96,
                                            102,174                  
                                           Rollnick,182              
                                           Ronan,K.R.,13             
                                           Rønnestad,M.H.,282        
                                           Rorer,L., 169             
                                           Rosario,A.C.,256          
                                           Rosenblatt,P.C., 322      
                                           Rosenthal,D.M., 331       
                                           Rosman,B., 340            
                                           Ross,A.O., 26,36          
                                           Rossiter,L., 385–386      
                                           Rowe,C.,342               
                                           Rowland,M.D., 13,341      
                                           Rowland,M.R.,341          
                                           Roy,J.,126                
                                           Rubin,A.,298

=== Page 419 (1 cols) ===
Author Index 405   
                                                                     
          Rubin,E.,361                                               
          Ruble,L., 359,361,364                                      
          Ruble,L. A.,xii,357,362                                    
          Rudolf,M., 298                                             
          Ruggiero,G.M., 159                                         
          Ruiz,A.S., 69                                              
          Russell,G.F.M.,340                                         
          Ryan,103                                                   
          Ryan,V., 91,93,97,98,102,103,                              
           105                                                       
          Sadoff,R.L.,50                                             
          Sage, R.M., 119                                            
          St.George,S., 331                                          
          Saldana, L., 341                                           
          Saleebey, D.,281                                           
          Sales, B.,49                                               
          Salkovskis,P.M.,129                                        
          Sandy, J.M.,73                                             
          Santisteban, D.A.,340                                      
          Santos,A.J.,137                                            
          Sapp,M.,198,254                                            
          Sassaroli,S., 159                                          
          Saunders,193                                               
          Saunders,L., 372                                           
          Sawalani, G.M.,137                                         
          Sawins,M., 337                                             
          Scamardo,M., 306,374–375                                   
          Schaefer, C.,91,93                                         
          Schaeffer, C.M.,341                                        
          Schechtaman, Z., 373,376                                   
          Scheeringa, M.S., 134                                      
          Scherer, D.G., 288,341                                     
          Schlossburg,M.C., 139,140                                  
          Schneider, S.,380                                          
          Schnicke, M. C.,134                                        
          Schnur, J.,171                                             
          Schoenwald, S.K.,13,341                                    
          Schopler, E.,359,363                                       
          Schottelkorb,A.,106                                        
          Schrier, C.J.,51                                           
          Schultz,R.T.,360                                           
          Schwartz,R.C.,327,328,335,336                              
          Schwartz,S., 340                                           
          Scott,C.V.,139                                             
          Sebold,J.,282                                              
          Selekman, M., 282,302,306                                  
          Seligman, M. E.P.,117,163                                  
          Sellers, R.M., 73                                          
          Selvini-Palazzoli, M.,331                                  
          Semrud-Clikeman, M.,374                                    
          Serovich, J.,322                                           
          Shadish, W.R.,339                                          
          Shah, I.,307                                               
          Shaknai, J.,362                                            
          Sharpe, D.,385–386                                         
          Sharry, J.,298                                             
          Shaw, C.M.,79                                              
                            Shea, V.,359                             
                            Shearn, D.,256                           
                            Sheeley, V.L.,44                         
                            Sheely-Moore, A.,106                     
                            Sheidow,A.J.,341                         
                            Shen, Y.,104,385                         
                            Shepherd,J.N.,50                         
                            Sherman, D.K.,119                        
                            Sherwood,V.,175                          
                            Shibusawa,T.,321                         
                            Shilts,L., 282,300,301                   
                            Shimokawa,K.,294                         
                            Shirk,S.R.,125,288                       
                            Shwery, 193                              
                            Siegel, D.,105                           
                            Siegel, L.J.,34                          
                            Sigman, M.,139                           
                            Silverman, M.S.,192,195,196              
                            Silverman, W.,106                        
                            Silverman, W.K.,340                      
                            Silverstein, O.,322                      
                            Silvestre,A.J.,74                        
                            Simic,M., 340                            
                            Simmonds,D.W.,36                         
                            Simon,J.,305                             
                            Simpson,R.,363                           
                            Singer, G.H.S., 383                      
                            Singh, N.N.,54                           
                            Sinha, J.W.,73                           
                            Siqueland,L., 342                        
                            Sites,E.W.,74                            
                            Skinner, B.F.,117                        
                            Sklare,G.B.,281                          
                            Skull,J.,371,372                         
                            Slaby, R.G.,138                          
                            Slesnick, N.,341                         
                            Slifer, K.J.,382                         
                            Slovenko,R.,50                           
                            Smetana, J.G.,7                          
                            Smith,C., 326                            
                            Smith,C.A., 171                          
                            Smith,D., 27,28,31,38,39                 
                            Smith,J.B.,288                           
                            Smith,L.A., 341                          
                            Smith,M.L., 18,19,192                    
                            Smith,P., 134                            
                            Smith,R.,298                             
                            Smith,S.R.,54                            
                            Sniscak,C. C.,103                        
                            Sofronoff,K.,364                         
                            Sorenson,G.P.,43,45,48,52,54             
                            Sparks,J.,21                             
                            Spence, S.H.,131,132                     
                            Sperry,L., 117                           
                            Spirito,A.,387,388                       
                            Sprenkle,D., 339,340                     
                            Springer, D.W.,298                       
                            Spurlock,J.,70                           
                                              Stallard, P.,125,136   
                                              Stambaugh, L.F.,341    
                                              Stams,G.J.J.M.,305     
                                              Stanton, M.D., 339     
                                              Stark,K.D.,127         
                                              Steege, M.W.,53        
                                              Stein, B.D., 135       
                                              Stein, M.B.,131        
                                              Stein, M.T.,131        
                                              Stein, R.,341          
                                              Steinberg, L., 7       
                                              Steiner, T.,287        
                                              Steinglass, P.,337     
                                              Stone, C.,37           
                                              Stone, W.L.,361        
                                              Stone-Fish, L.,332     
                                              Storey, K.,306         
                                              Strahilov, B.E., 282   
                                              Streeter, C.L., 306    
                                              Streiner, D. L.,360    
                                              Strong, T.,331         
                                              Strosahl, K.D., 115,173
                                              Stucky, B.D.,137       
                                              Stuhlman, M.W.,300     
                                              Stulmaker, H.,106      
                                              Sturmey, P.,368,369    
                                              Sue,D., 62,63,64,65,69,75,78,
                                               79,80                 
                                              Sue,D. W.,63,64,65,69,75,78,79
                                              Sukhodolsky,D.G.,139   
                                              Sullivan, J.,106       
                                              Surratt,A.V.,363       
                                              Suzuki,L.A.,66         
                                              Sweeney, D.S., 103,104 
                                              Sweezy, M., 328,335    
                                              Sywulak,A.E., 103      
                                              Szabo,P.,282           
                                              Szalavitz, M.,91,105   
                                              Szapocznik, J.,340     
                                              Szatman, P.,360        
                                              Tafrate,R.C.,162       
                                              Tager-Flusberg,H.,360  
                                              Tamasese,K.,322        
                                              Tamborella,E.,259      
                                              Tangeman, J.A.,255     
                                              Tanguay, P.,364        
                                              Tankersley, M.,363     
                                              Tantam,D., 360         
                                              Tatum,D., 75           
                                              Taylor,S.E., 119,283   
                                              Teasdale,J.D.,117      
                                              Tebbenkamp,K.,362      
                                              Teeters,A.,134         
                                              Terjesen,M., 155,170,187
                                              Terlonge,C., 367       
                                              Teubert,D., 385        
                                              Thase,M. E.,115,120

=== Page 420 (1 cols) ===
406   A                                                        
             UTHOR                                                   
                I                                                    
                 NDEX                                                
      Thienemann, M.,139                                             
      Thomas,M.,328                                                  
      Thomas,T.,137                                                  
      Thompson,C.,262                                                
      Thompson,W.,288                                                
      Thorne,J.,258                                                  
      Tiba,A.,190                                                    
      Tien, L.,322                                                   
      Todd,T.C.,339                                                  
      Tolan,J.,94                                                    
      Tolan,P.H.,4,5                                                 
      Toland,M.,359                                                  
      Tomm,K.,331                                                    
      Tompkins,K.,139                                                
      Toste,J.R.,119                                                 
      Tramontana,M.G., 18                                            
      Trepper,T.S.,282,287,289                                       
      Trexler,L.D., 192,193                                          
      Trip,S., 187,195,197                                           
      Tripodi,S.J.,306                                               
      Tsai,M.,106                                                    
      Tubbs,C.Y.,322                                                 
      Tuchman,R.,359                                                 
      Turner,C.W.,340,341                                            
      Turner,R.,342                                                  
      Turner,S.,129                                                  
      Tyc,V.L.,386                                                   
      Uken,A., 282                                                   
      Unger, J.B.,68                                                 
      Valeri, S.M.,142                                               
      Van Ameringen, M., 131                                         
      VandeCreek, L., 50                                             
      Van deHout,W.J.,196–197                                        
      Van derSleen, J.,196                                           
      VanFleet, R.,103                                               
      vanHecke,A.V.,364                                              
      Vansoyoc, S. L.,20                                             
      Varhely, K.,288                                                
      Vasquez, M.T.,192                                              
      Vaughn, B.E.,137                                               
      Velleman, S., 136                                              
      Vernon, A.,170,181,183,186,187,                                
        195,197                                                      
      Vervaeke, S., 372                                              
      Vetere, A.,326                                                 
                         Vierling, L.,49,50                          
                         Volkmar,F.R.,360                            
                         Wachtel, P.L.,279                           
                         Wade,S.L., 377,382,383                      
                         Wadsworth,B.J.,6                            
                         Wadsworth,M.E., 80                          
                         Waldo,S.L.,41                               
                         Waldron,H.,340                              
                         Waldron,H.B.,341                            
                         Walz,N.C.,377                               
                         Wampold,B.E., 288                           
                         Warburton,J.,340                            
                         Ward,A.B., 381                              
                         Ward,D.M.,341                               
                         Wark,L.,328                                 
                         Warschausky, S.,381,383                     
                         Waters,V.,184                               
                         Watkins,N.L.,79                             
                         Watson,J.B., 117                            
                         Watzlawick,P.,280,323,324,                  
                          331                                        
                         Weakland,J.,280,323                         
                         Webb,C. A.,136                              
                         Webb,E., 334                                
                         Webb-Ferebee,K.,103                         
                         Weems,C.F.,134                              
                         WeigelFoy,C., 322                           
                         Weiner-Davis, M., 281,282,290,              
                          305,326                                    
                         Weiss,B.,197                                
                         Weissman,M.M., 66                           
                         Weisz,J.R.,3,18,19,20,142,188,              
                          197                                        
                         Welch, R.,257                               
                         Welfel, E.R.,35                             
                         Wells,K.C.,340                              
                         Wells,M.G.,21                               
                         Wessel,I.,196–197                           
                         West,J.,91                                  
                         Westermark,P.K.,341                         
                         Wheeler, J.,282                             
                         Whidby,J.M.,137                             
                         White,H.,129                                
                         White,J.R.,141                              
                         White,M.,326                                
                         Whiting, R.A.,331                           
                                           Wicker,C.W.,261           
                                           Wiener,J.,374,376         
                                           Wiest,J., 262             
                                           Wilde,184                 
                                           Wilkins,P.,95             
                                           Williams,T.I.,129         
                                           Willis,H.,362             
                                           Willoughby,T.,372         
                                           Wills,T.A.,73             
                                           Willutzki,U., 282         
                                           Wilson,F.J.,360           
                                           Wilson,K.,91,97,98,102    
                                           Wilson,K.G.,115,173       
                                           Wing,L., 359              
                                           Winkler,A.M.,371,372      
                                           Winkler,R.C.,54           
                                           Winnett,R.A.,54           
                                           Winnicott,D.W.,92         
                                           Winslade,J.,338           
                                           Witt,J.C.,50              
                                           Wittman,W.D.,43           
                                           Wolfe,J.,181              
                                           Wolin,S.,296              
                                           Wolpe,J.,117,162          
                                           Wong,E.,262               
                                           Wood,J.J.,139,140         
                                           Woods,P.J.,192,194,197    
                                           Wright,J.H., 115,120      
                                           Wubbolding,R.,235,236,240,253
                                           Wulff,D.,331              
                                           Yaeger, A.M.,73           
                                           Yarbrough,J.,262          
                                           Yarnish, P.,258           
                                           Yell, M.L.,54             
                                           Yevisker,M., 382          
                                           Young,A.,129              
                                           Zajonc, R.B.,168          
                                           Zeeman, R.,255            
                                           Zein, F.,361              
                                           Zettle,R.,192,195         
                                           Zirkelback,E.A.,19        
                                           Ziskind,E.L., 328,335     
                                           Zorn,R.,253               
                                           Zucker,S., 300            
                                           Zunin, L.,226,252,254

=== Page 421 (1 cols) ===
Subject     Index                          
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                     
          Abuse.See Childabuse;Substance abuse                       
          Acceptance andcommitmenttherapy, 115                       
          Ackerman,Nathan, 318                                       
          ADHD.See Attentiondeficithyperactivitydisorder             
          Adolescents.SeeChildren andadolescents                     
          AfricanAmericans, 68,69,76,78–79,106                       
          Age:                                                       
           ageofconsentfortreatment,50                               
           developmentalissuesrelatedto(see Developmental            
              issues)                                                
           traumaticbraininjuryvariance by,377                       
          Aggression,137–139,379.SeealsoBehavioraland                
              conductdisorders;Violence                              
          AlbertEllis Institute,158,186,205–206                      
          Alcoholuse. SeeSubstanceabuse                              
          AmericanAcademyofChildandAdolescentPsychiatry              
              (AACAP), 366,367,370,372,373,375                       
          AmericanAssociationofMarriage andFamilyTherapy             
              (AAMFT),319                                            
          AmericanCounseling Association(ACA), 40,62                 
          AmericanFamilyTherapyAcademy(AFTA),320                     
          AmericanIndians/Alaskan Natives,79–80                      
          AmericanOrthopsychiatric Association,2                     
          AmericanPsychological Association:                         
           codeofethicsof,28–29,31,37–39,40–41,50,53                 
           intellectual disabilitiesstatisticsof,365                 
           multiculturalstandardsofpractice,62                       
           resolutiononeffectiveness ofpsychotherapy, 192            
          AmericanSchoolCounselorAssociation,33,40–41,53             
          Antisocialbehavior, 4,13.See alsoBehavioraland             
              conductdisorders                                       
          Anxietyandanxietydisorders:                                
           child-centered playtherapyaddressing, 97                  
           cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesto,           
              119,123,124,127–129,131–134,136–137,                   
              140,141–142,364,369–370,376                            
           comorbidconditionswith,131,134,360,363,364,               
              366,369–370,374,376,379–380,387                        
           familial, 381,383,386,388                                 
           familytherapy/systemic approachesto,340,342               
           irrationalbeliefsresultingin, 171,172,173                 
           prevalenceof,5                                            
           rationalemotivebehaviortherapyfor,191,196,197,            
              201,205                                                
           realitytherapyapproachesto,224                            
           researchon,17                                             
                                       schoolphobiaas,17,133–134     
                                       socialphobiaas,17,131–134,191,197
                                       solutions-focusedapproachesto,298,299–300,374
                                     ArabandMuslimAmericans, 82      
                                     AsianAmericans/Pacific Islanders,68,74,80–81,82–85,
                                         106–108                     
                                     Assessmentanddiagnosis:         
                                       BASIC ID/BASICIDEAL approachesto,12
                                       cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproaches
                                         including, 124,143–144,147  
                                       culturallyresponsiveinterpersonaltherapyincluding,
                                         67–71,83–84                 
                                       developmentalconsiderationsin, 6
                                       Diagnostic andStatistical ManualofMental Disorders use
                                         for,25,143,358,365,372      
                                       disability-related interventionsincluding, 83,358,
                                         360–361,365,372             
                                       family therapy/systemicapproachesincluding, 344
                                       functional behavioralassessmentsas,360–361
                                       instrumentsfor(see Assessmentinstruments)
                                       rational emotivebehaviortherapyincluding, 188–189
                                       solution-focusedapproachesto,285–286
                                     Assessmentinstruments:          
                                       Acculturation, Habits,andInterests,Multicultural
                                         Scale forAdolescents(AHIMSA), 68
                                       Behavioral AcademicSelf-Esteem RatingScale, 260
                                       BehaviorAssessmentSystemforChildren (BASC),
                                         261                         
                                       Child-Rearing Practices Questionnaire,258
                                       CoopersmithSelf-Esteem Inventory,260
                                       JonesIntentional MulticulturalInterviewSchedule
                                         (JIMIS), 70                 
                                       Likertscale, 262–263          
                                       Menstrual DistressQuestionnaire(MDQ), 261
                                       Nowicki-StricklandInternal-External Scale, 256
                                       Nowicki-StricklandLocusofControlScalefor
                                         Children, 258,259           
                                       OutcomeQuestionnaires(OQ), 21 
                                       OutcomeRatingScale(ORS), 21   
                                       Piers-HarrisChildren’s Self-Concept Scale, 261
                                       ReynoldsAdolescentDepressionScale, secondedition
                                         (RADS-2), 366               
                                       SubjectiveUnitsofDistressScale (SUDS), 124,162
                                     AssociationforMulticulturalCounseling and
                                         Development, 62             
                                     AssociationofFamilyTherapyandSystemicPractice,320
                                   407

=== Page 422 (1 cols) ===
408   S                                                        
            UBJECT                                                   
                I                                                    
                NDEX                                                 
      Attachment-basedfamily therapy, 342                            
      Attentiondeficithyperactivitydisorder(ADHD):                   
        child-centered playtherapyaddressing,97                      
        cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesto,              
           141,376                                                   
        comorbidconditionswith,372,374,376,379                       
        medicationfor,51                                             
        mindfulness trainingfor,376                                  
        prevalence of,5                                              
        solution-focusedapproachesto,374                             
      Autismspectrumdisorders:                                       
        assessmentof,358,360–361                                     
        behaviorsandabilitiesimpactedby,359,360–361                  
        children/adolescents withdisabilitieswith,5,                 
           358–365,389–390                                           
        cognitivetheorieson/approachesto,358–359,                    
           359–360,362–365                                           
        comorbidconditionswith,359,360–361,363,364                   
        coresymptomstreatmentfor,362–364                             
        familial andparentissueswith,362,364–365                     
        prevalence of,5                                              
        resourceson,389–390                                          
        therapeuticapproachesto,361–364                              
      Axline, Virginia, 2–3,92,93                                    
      BASICID/BASIC IDEALapproaches,12                               
      Behavioral andconductdisorders.SeealsoAttention                
           deficithyperactivitydisorder                              
        aggressionas,137–139,379                                     
        antisocial behaviorin, 4,13                                  
        child-centered playtherapyaddressing,95,97,99,               
           104,106                                                   
        cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesto,              
           119,137–139,382                                           
        comorbidconditionswith,360–361,366,368,372,                  
           373,379,382,385                                           
        delinquentbehaviorin,4,13,17,217–218,242,                    
           253–254,258–259,340–341                                   
        family structureimpacting, 321                               
        family therapy/systemicapproachesto,13,340–341,              
           343–346                                                   
        grouptherapychallenges with,185,242                          
        multisystemictherapyfor,13,341                               
        parenttraining for,368                                       
        prevalence of,4,5                                            
        rationalemotivebehaviortherapyfor,185,188–190,               
           196,198                                                   
        realitytherapyapproachesto,217–218,225,229,242,              
           244–250,253–254,258–263                                   
        research on,17                                               
        solutions-focusedapproachesto,298,301,306,                   
           307–309                                                   
      Behavioral approaches. SeeCognitive-behavioral and             
           behavioralapproaches                                      
      Bellahv.Greenson(1978), 46                                     
      Benskinv.TaftCitySchool District(1980), 51                     
      Berg,InsooKim,280                                              
      Bertanlanffy, Ludwigvon,318                                    
                                  Bibliotherapy, 239–240             
                                  Binet,Alfred,2                     
                                  Bipolardisorder,360                
                                  Bisexuals,74                       
                                  BriefFamilyTherapyCenter (BFTC),280,281,304
                                  Brieftherapy:                      
                                   briefstrategicfamily therapyas,340
                                   child-centered playtherapyas,104–105
                                   solution-focusedbrieftherapyas,280–281,305–306,
                                      333,370,374–375                
                                  California AssociationofMarriageandFamily
                                      Therapists,320                 
                                  Casestudies,byname:                
                                   Amara,82–85                       
                                   Jack,245–250                      
                                   John,266–271                      
                                   Julian,297                        
                                   Julie,143–147                     
                                   Lily, 291–292                     
                                   LittleHans,2                      
                                   Mariaandparents,307–309           
                                   Marisa,297–298                    
                                   Mia,106–108                       
                                   Michele M.,200–205                
                                   Susan,343–346                     
                                  Casestudies,bytopic:               
                                   child-centered playtherapy, 106–108
                                   cognitive-behavioralandbehavioralapproaches,
                                      143–147                        
                                   culturallyresponsiveinterpersonaltherapy, 82–85
                                   familytherapy/systemic approaches,343–346
                                   rationalemotivebehaviortherapy, 200–205
                                   realitytherapyapproaches,219,245–250,266–271
                                   solution-focusedapproaches,291–292,297–298,
                                      299–300,307–309                
                                  CBT.See Cognitive-behavioralandbehavioral
                                      approaches                     
                                  CentersforDisease ControlandPrevention (CDC), 5
                                  Childabuse:                        
                                   cognitive-behavioralandbehavioralapproachesto
                                      traumafrom,143–147             
                                   ethicalissuesrelatedto,32,37–38   
                                   legalissuesrelatedto,48–49,52     
                                   solution-focusedapproachesto,282  
                                   traumaticbraininjuryfrom,377      
                                  Child/adolescent counseling andpsychotherapy:
                                   adolescent-specificissuesin, 7,10–12
                                   assessmentfor(see Assessmentanddiagnosis)
                                   casestudiesof(seeCasestudies,byname;Casestudies,
                                      bytopic)                       
                                   child-centered playtherapyas,2–3,91–109
                                   childparentrelationshiptherapyas,93,105,106
                                   childteacherrelationship therapyas,105,106
                                   chronicneedfor,3–5                
                                   cognitive-behavioralandbehavioralapproachesas
                                      (seeCognitive-behavioral andbehavioral
                                      approaches)

=== Page 423 (1 cols) ===
Subject Index 409  
                                                                     
           community-basedtreatmentas,3                              
           confidentialityof,28–29,35,37–39,43–49,52–53,54           
           culturalissuesconsideredin(see Culturalissues)            
           culturallyresponsiveinterpersonaltherapyas,61–86          
           developmentissuesconsideredin(see Developmental           
              issues)                                                
           disability-relatedissuesimpacting, 3,5,32,44,             
              53,54,83,196,200,298,299,306,357–389                   
              (see alsoMedicalhealth issues)                         
           efficacyof,14–20,142–143,192–199,253–265,                 
              304–307,339–342                                        
           environmental influencesconsideredin,9–10                 
           ethical issuesfor(see Ethical issues)                     
           evidence-basedtreatmentsas,3,20–21,53–54,61,              
              97–98,128                                              
           familytherapyas(seeFamilytherapy)                         
           filialtherapyas,93,97–98,102–103,105,108                  
           goalsettingin(seeGoalsetting)                             
           grouptherapyas(see Grouptherapy)                          
           historicalperspectiveson,2–3 (see alsounderspecific       
              treatments)                                            
           legalissuesfor,26–27,28,36,38,42–55                       
           mentalhealth issuesleading to(seeMental health            
              issues)                                                
           motivationfor,7–8                                         
           multimodalandmultisystemicapproachesto,12–14,             
              341(seealsoSystemicapproaches)                         
           multisystemictherapyas,13–14,341                          
           overviewof,1,21–22                                        
           personalityconsideredin,6,10,91–92,115–116,               
              327–328,335–336                                        
           playtherapyas,2–3,91–109,334–335                          
           professionalsproviding(see Therapistsand                  
              counselors)                                            
           psychoanalysis as,2,91–92,116–117,318                     
           rationalemotivebehaviortherapyas,115,155–205              
           realitytherapyas,115,217–271                              
           researchon,14–20                                          
           school-basedinterventions as(see School-based             
              interventions)                                         
           solution-focusedapproachesas,279–310,326,                 
              332–333,370,374–375                                    
           uniqueaspectsof,7–12                                      
           visionforfuture,5                                         
          Child-centered playtherapy(CCPT):                          
           adolescentapplicationof,102                               
           basicassumptionsof,93–94                                  
           briefversionof,104–105                                    
           casestudyof,106–108                                       
           clinical applicationsof,98–105                            
           congruence focusin,96                                     
           cultureconsideredin,99,106                                
           educationalapplicationsof,105–106                         
           empathicunderstandingin, 96–97                            
           empiricalsupportfor,97–98                                 
           familyandparentparticipationin,93,103,104–105,            
              108                                                    
           goalsandprocessofchange in,95–97,103                      
                                       groupsettingfor,92,102,103–104
                                       guiding principlesof,99       
                                       historyandstatusof,2–3,91–93  
                                       limitsettingin, 101–102       
                                       overviewof,91,109             
                                       parenting applicationsof,105  
                                       psychological maladjustmentleadingto,94–95
                                       settingandmaterialsfor,99     
                                       theory/philosophy underlying, 93–97
                                       therapeuticrelationships in,95–97,99,101,109
                                       therapeuticskillsneededfor,99–102
                                       unconditional positiveregardin,96
                                       very-youngchildapplicationof,102–103
                                     Childparentrelationshiptherapy(CPRT), 93,105,106
                                     Childrenandadolescents:         
                                       abuseormaltreatmentof,32,37–38,48–49,52,
                                         143–147,282,377             
                                       counseling for(see Child/adolescent counseling and
                                         psychotherapy)              
                                       culturalissuesamong(see Culturalissues)
                                       developmentalissuesfor(see Developmentalissues)
                                       withdisabilities(see Disabilities, childrenand
                                         adolescentswith)            
                                       families of(see Familiesandparents)
                                       informedconsentof,28,35,49–51 
                                       mental healthissuesamong(see Mental health
                                         issues)                     
                                       personalities of(see Personality)
                                     Childteacherrelationshiptherapy(CTRT), 105,106
                                     Choicetheory, 220,223–224,236–240,263–264
                                     Circularity, 325–326            
                                     Cognitive-behavioralandbehavioralapproaches:
                                       acceptance andcommitmenttherapyas,115
                                       adolescent applicationsof,135–139
                                       affective educationin,123     
                                       toaggression,137–139          
                                       toanxietyandanxiety disorders,119,123,124,
                                         127–129,131–134,136–137,140,141–142,
                                         364,369–370,376             
                                       assessmentin, 124,143–144,147 
                                       toattentiondeficithyperactivitydisorder,141,376
                                       toautismspectrumdisorders,358–359,359–360,
                                         362–365                     
                                       basictheoryandassumptionsof,118–119
                                       tobehavioralandconductdisorders,119,137–139,
                                         382                         
                                       casestudyof,143–147           
                                       child applicationsof,124–135  
                                       cognitive picturerehearsalas,363
                                       cognitive processingtherapyas,144–147
                                       cognitive restructuringtherapiesas,120,122,126,
                                         127,130,133,134,136,138,140 
                                       communication facilitation in,140,146
                                       computerized,136–137          
                                       contingent reinforcement in,128,140,387
                                       Coping Catprogramas,127–128   
                                       copingskillstherapiesin,120,123,126,127–129,
                                         133,135,387

=== Page 424 (1 cols) ===
410   S                                                        
            UBJECT                                                   
                I                                                    
                NDEX                                                 
      Cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproaches                   
           (continued)                                               
        todepressionanddepressivedisorders,118,119,125,              
           126–127,135–137,140,141,143–147,364,                      
           374,376                                                   
        developmentalconsiderationsin, 118,124–126,135,              
           140                                                       
        dialectic behaviortherapyas,115                              
        disability-relatedinterventions as,53,358–359,               
           359–360,362–365,367–370,374,375–376,                      
           380,382,386–388                                           
        toeating disorders,141,142                                   
        efficacy of,142–143                                          
        evidence-based, 53–54,128                                    
        exposuretherapyorimageryin, 124,128,130,                     
           131–132,133,134,135,136,140                               
        family andparentparticipationin,125,128–131,132,             
           133,134,139–140,142,143–144,145,                          
           146–147,362,364–365,388                                   
        family interventionsin,130–131,139–140,388                   
        feedbackin,121                                               
        generalization in, 121,362,375                               
        goalsettingin,54,121                                         
        groupsettingfor,129,135,141–142                              
        historyandstatusof,3,116–118                                 
        homeworkassignments in,121,126,128,130,133,                  
           138,141,145,362,374                                       
        tointellectual disabilities, 367–370                         
        tolearning disabilities, 374,375–376                         
        mindfulness trainingin, 123,376                              
        normalization in,130                                         
        toobsessive-compulsivedisorder,124,129–131,364               
        overviewof,115–116                                           
        parentcounseling andskillstraining as,141,142,               
           364–365,375                                               
        person-centeredapproachesas,115                              
        toposttraumaticstressdisorder,124,134–135,140,               
           141,143–147                                               
        problemsolvingtherapiesin,120,122,126,127,132,               
           136,138,145,387                                           
        psychoeducationin,123,127,129–130,131,133,134,               
           136,140,145,364–365                                       
        rationalemotivebehaviortherapyas,115,155                     
        realitytherapyas,115                                         
        relapsepreventionin,121,128                                  
        relaxationtraining in,123,126,128,132,134,363,               
           386–387                                                   
        roleplayingandmodelingin,122,123,124,126,128,                
           133,138,141,362                                           
        safetyplanning in, 135                                       
        school-basedinterventionsusing,53–54,141                     
        self-instructional training as,115                           
        self-monitoring in,122–123,127                               
        self-regulation/self-management in,123,127,363               
        tosocialphobia,131–134                                       
        socialskillstrainingin, 132,138,141,362,375,                 
           376                                                       
        Socraticquestioningin, 121                                   
                                   somaticmanagement skillsin,127,136
                                   techniquesusedin,120–124          
                                   theoryunderlying,118–120,359–360  
                                   trauma-focused,134–135,140,143–147
                                   totraumaticbraininjuries, 380,382 
                                   viewofpsychopathologyin, 119–120  
                                   visualsupportsorcuing in,362–363,364
                                  CollaborativeFamilyHealthcareAssociation,319
                                  Collectivistorientation, 64,66,67,73,79,80–81,82
                                  CommissiononAccreditationforMarriageandFamily
                                      TherapyEducation(COAMFTE), 319 
                                  Communication:                     
                                   cognitive-behavioralandbehavioralapproachesto,
                                      140,146                        
                                   communicationanalysis, 73–76      
                                   culturalinfluences andinterpretationsof,40–41,
                                      72–76                          
                                   language for,9,40–41,75           
                                   nonverbal,75,100                  
                                   solution-focusedapproachimportanceof,281,
                                      283–284                        
                                   traumaticbraininjuriesimpacting, 378–379
                                  Communitymentalhealth movement,3   
                                  Computer-basedissues.SeeInternet-orcomputer-based
                                      issues                         
                                  Conductdisorders.SeeBehavioralandconductdisorders
                                  Contingent reinforcement, 128,140,387
                                  Controltheory,219–220,222–223      
                                  Copingskills:                      
                                   cognitive-behavioralandbehavioralapproachesto,
                                      120,123,126,127–129,133,135,387
                                   CopingCatprogramincluding, 127–128
                                   rationalemotivebehaviortherapyapproachto,
                                      177–178,202–205                
                                   solution-focusedcopingquestionson,295
                                  Counseling. SeeChild/adolescent counseling and
                                      psychotherapy                  
                                  Counselors.SeeTherapistsandcounselors
                                  Culturalissues.Seealsospecificminoritygroups
                                   acculturationas,67–68,70–71,72,80,81–82,84
                                   child-centered playtherapyconsiderationof,99,
                                      106                            
                                   counselorculturalcompetencewith,30,62–66
                                   culturalliteracy buildingabout,65–66
                                   culturallyresponsiveinterpersonaltherapyaddressing,
                                      61–86                          
                                   definitionsrelatedto,63–64        
                                   demographicsreflecting,61         
                                   discriminationandprejudicebasedon,74,79,81–82
                                   ethicalissuesrelatedto,30,40–41,62–66
                                   genderrolesas,72                  
                                   intersectionality ofidentitiesas,322–323
                                   language as,40–41,75              
                                   racial/cultural/ethnic identityas,68–70,72,74,79,
                                      81,82,84,322–323               
                                   religionandspiritualityas,78–79,82,156–157
                                   sexualidentityas,72,74            
                                   socioeconomicsas,75,106

=== Page 425 (1 cols) ===
Subject Index 411  
                                                                     
           stereotypingbasedon,65                                    
           systemicapproaches/family therapyconsideration of,        
              322–323,326                                            
          Culturallyresponsiveinterpersonal therapy(CR-IPTa):        
           acculturationconsideredin,67–68,70–71,72,80,              
              81–82,84                                               
           casestudyof,82–85                                         
           child/adolescent applicationsof,66–67                     
           collectivistorientationin,64,66,67,73,79,80–81,           
              82                                                     
           communicationanalysis in,73–76                            
           contracting forfocusontreatmentin, 70–71                  
           counselorself-awareness in,65                             
           culturalcontextidentificationin, 67–68,83–84              
           culturalliteracy buildingin,65–66                         
           culture,definedfor,63                                     
           demographicsnecessitating, 61                             
           diagnosticformulationandeducationin, 67–71,               
              83–84                                                  
           ethnic identityissuesin,68–70,72,74,79,81,82,84           
           facilitatedproblemsolvingin, 71–76                        
           familiesandparentsin,71–72,84                             
           JonesIntentional MulticulturalInterview Schedule          
              usein,70                                               
           multicultural,definedfor,63                               
           multiculturalclinical skillapplicationin, 66              
           multiculturalcompetence, definedfor,63–64                 
           multiculturalstandardsofpractice,62–66                    
           overviewof,61                                             
           religionandspiritualityconsideredin, 78–79,82             
           resourceson,85–86                                         
           roleplaying alternativeinteractions in,76                 
           sense-makinginsocialinteractions in,72–73                 
           sexualidentityissuesin,72,74                              
           specificpopulationstrengthsandchallenges in,78–82         
           terminationof,76–78,85                                    
           therapeuticrelationshipsin, 64–66                         
           treatmentprocessin,67–78,84                               
          Delinquent behavior:                                       
           familytherapy/systemic approachesto,13,340–341            
           multisystemictherapyfor,13,341                            
           prevalenceof,4                                            
           realitytherapyapproachesto,217–218,242,253–254,           
              258–259                                                
           researchon,17                                             
          Depressionanddepressivedisorders:                          
           child-centered playtherapyaddressing, 97                  
           cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesto,           
              118,119,125,126–127,135–137,140,141,                   
              143–147,364,374,376                                    
           comorbidconditionswith,131,134,135,360,364,               
              366,372,374,376,379–380,385,387                        
           familial, 381,383,386,388                                 
           familystructureimpacting, 321                             
           familytherapy/systemic approachesto,317,340,342           
           irrationalbeliefsresultingin, 171,172,173                 
           medicationfor,126                                         
                                       prevalence of,5               
                                       rational emotivebehaviortherapyfor,196,201,204
                                       reality therapyapproachesto,224–225,229
                                       suicideattemptsandideationrelatedto,135–136
                                     deShazer, Steve,280             
                                     Developmentalissues:            
                                       adolescent-specific, 7        
                                       child/adolescent counseling considerationof,5–7,9,
                                         10                          
                                       child-centered playtherapyconsiderationof,91,92,
                                         102–103,104                 
                                       cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproaches
                                         consideration of,118,124–126,135,140
                                       family developmentas,321–322  
                                       family therapyconsiderationof,321–322,335–336
                                       personalitydevelopmentas,6,10 
                                       Piaget’s theoryof,6–7,125     
                                       rational emotivebehaviortherapyconsideration of,
                                         181,184–185                 
                                       reality therapyconsiderationof,242,262
                                       research impactedby, 16       
                                       solution-focusedapproachconsiderationof,287
                                       verbal/language abilityas,9   
                                     Diagnosis.See Assessmentanddiagnosis
                                     DiagnosticandStatistical ManualofMentalDisorders
                                         (DSM), 25,143,358,365,372   
                                     Dialectic behaviortherapy, 115  
                                     Directivefamilyplaytherapy, 334–335
                                     Disabilities,children andadolescentswith:
                                       assessmentof,83,358,360–361,365,372
                                       autismspectrumdisordersin, 5,358–365,389–390
                                       cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesfor,
                                         53,358–359,359–360,362–365,367–370,374,
                                         375–376,380,382,386–388     
                                       collaborationofprofessionalsworkingwith,357–358,
                                         370                         
                                       comorbidconditionsamong,359,360–361,363,364,
                                         366–367,368–370,372,373–374,376,
                                         379–380,382,385,387         
                                       copingskillstherapiesfor,387  
                                       evidence-basedinterventions for,53
                                       familial andparentalinvolvementwith,358,362,
                                         364–365,380,381,382–383,385–386,
                                         388–389                     
                                       family therapyfor,380,382–383,388–389
                                       general considerationswith,357–358
                                       groupcounseling for,374,376,388–389
                                       humanistic psychotherapyfor,376
                                       IndividualswithDisabilities EducationImprovement
                                         Actfor,3,32,44,53,54,365,372,384
                                       intellectual anddevelopmentaldisabilitiesin,298,
                                         306,359,365–371,390         
                                       intervention implicationsfor,357–389
                                       learning disabilitiesin, 53,83,196,200,371–377,
                                         385,390                     
                                       medication for,370            
                                       mindfulness trainingfor,376   
                                       overviewofissuesfor,357,389

=== Page 426 (1 cols) ===
412   S                                                        
            UBJECT                                                   
                I                                                    
                NDEX                                                 
      Disabilities, children andadolescentswith(continued)           
        parentcounseling/training forparentsof,358,                  
           364–365,368,375,382–383                                   
        physical disabilitiesin,384–389,391(see alsoMedical          
           health issues)                                            
        problemsolvingtraining for,387                               
        progressmonitoringof,370–371,376                             
        relaxationtraining for,386–387                               
        resourceson,389–391                                          
        school-basedinterventionsfor,53,83,200,299,357,              
           365,371–377,379,380–381                                   
        socialskillstrainingfor,362,375,376,383                      
        solution-focusedapproachesfor,298,306,370,                   
           374–375                                                   
        therapeuticmodificationstoaccommodate,358,364,               
           367,370,373–374,376                                       
        traumaticbraininjuryin,377–383,390–391                       
      Discipline, 233–234,245–250                                    
      Domesticviolence, 282. SeealsoChild abuse                      
      Druguse.SeeMedication; Substanceabuse                          
      Dutytoinform,46–47                                             
      Dutytowarn,45–46,47–49                                         
      Eating disorders:                                              
        cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesto,              
           141,142                                                   
        confidentiality oftreatmentfor,46                            
        family structureimpacting, 321                               
        family therapy/systemicapproachesto,340                      
        rationalemotivebehaviortherapyfor,196                        
      Educationandtraining:                                          
        infamily therapy/systemicapproaches,319–320                  
        psychoeducational (seePsychoeducation)                       
        inrationalemotivebehaviortherapy, 158                        
        inrealitytherapyapproaches,218,220,261,263                   
        skillstraining as(see Copingskills;Mindfulness               
           training; Parent counselingandskillstraining;             
           Problemsolving;Relaxationtraining; Social                 
           skillstraining; Stressmanagement)                         
        oftherapistsandcounselors,29–30,39,158,218,220,              
           261,263,319–320                                           
      EducatorTrainingCenter, 218                                    
      Efficacy oftreatments.See alsoEvidence-based                   
           treatments                                                
        ofcognitive-behavioralandbehavioralapproaches,               
           142–143                                                   
        offamilytherapy/systemic approaches,339–342                  
        ofrationalemotivebehaviortherapy, 192–199                    
        ofrealitytherapyapproaches,253–265                           
        research on,14–20                                            
        ofsolution-focusedapproaches,304–307                         
      Eiselv.BoardofEducation (1991), 47                             
      Electronic issues.SeeInternet-orcomputer-basedissues           
      Ellis, Albert,155,156–158                                      
      AlbertEllisInstitute,158,186,205–206                           
      Empathic understanding,96–97                                   
      Environmental influences, 9–10. SeealsoCulturalissues          
      Erickson, Milton,280                                           
                                  Ethical issues:                    
                                   childabusereportingas,32,37–38    
                                   childandparentalrightsas,35–37    
                                   clientidentification as,28,33–35  
                                   codesofethicson,26–29,31–33,37–39,40–41,50,
                                      53                             
                                   competenceas,29–30,39             
                                   confidentialityas,28–29,35,37–39,48
                                   conflictsofinterestas,27          
                                   culturalsensitivityandcompetenceas,30,40–41,
                                      62–66                          
                                   informedconsentas,28,32–33,34,35,41–42,50
                                   interpreterusageas,40–41          
                                   legalissuedistinction from,26–27,28,42,48,50,55
                                   medicationuseas,42                
                                   multiplerelationships as,31       
                                   overviewofimportanceof,25–26,55   
                                   parentalrole/consentas,28,32–33,34,35–37,41–42
                                   privatepracticecreating, 30–31    
                                   professionalrelationshipsas,29    
                                   publicstatementsandpresentationsas,30
                                   recentissueshighlighting, 40–42   
                                   responsibilityandclient welfareas,27–28
                                   school-basedinterventions facing, 29–42,53–54
                                   schoolviolence creating, 41       
                                   secondopinionsas,39               
                                   sexuality-relatedissuesas,42      
                                   suicideattemptsandideationcreating, 41–42
                                   violationsof,31–32                
                                  EuropeanBriefTherapyAssociation(EBTA),281
                                  Evidence-basedtreatments. SeealsoEfficacyoftreatments
                                   child-centered playtherapyas,97–98
                                   cognitive-behavioralandbehavioralapproachesas,
                                      53–54,128                      
                                   empiricallysupportedtreatmentsas,20–21
                                   historicalperspectiveson,3        
                                   interpersonaltherapyas,61         
                                   practice-basedevidence for,21     
                                   resourceson,20,21                 
                                   school-basedinterventions using,53
                                  Ewingv.Goldstein(2004), 46–47      
                                  Exposuretherapy:                   
                                   cognitive-behavioralandbehavioralapproachesto,
                                      124,128,130,131–132,133,134,135,136,140
                                   rationalemotivebehaviortherapyincluding, 197
                                  Familiesandparents:                
                                   anxietyanddepressionin,381,383,386,388
                                   beliefsystemsof,324–326,331–334,346
                                   child-centered playtherapyparticipationof,93,103,
                                      104–105,108                    
                                   childrenof(seeChildren andadolescents)
                                   circularityofbehaviorin,325–326   
                                   cognitive-behavioralandbehavioralapproaches
                                      including, 125,128–131,132,133,134,
                                      139–140,142,143–144,145,146–147,362,
                                      364–365,388                    
                                   culturalissuesamong(see Culturalissues)

=== Page 427 (1 cols) ===
Subject Index 413  
                                                                     
           culturallyresponsiveinterpersonaltherapy                  
              participationby,71–72,84                               
           disability-relatedinterventions involving,358,362,        
              364–365,380,381,382–383,385–386,                       
              388–389                                                
           ethical issuesinvolving,28,32–33,34,35–37,41–42           
           familydevelopmentandlifecycle,321–322                     
           familymythsin,190                                         
           familytherapyfor(see Familytherapy)                       
           informedconsentof,28,32–33,34,35,41–42,49–51              
           interactional patternsin, 323–324,325,330–331             
           legalrightsandresponsibilitiesof,36,44,49–52              
           parentcounselingfor(seeParent counselingandskills         
              training)                                              
           rationalemotivebehaviortherapyinvolvementof,              
              187–191,198,200,202,204–205                            
           realitytherapyinvolving,250–253,257–258,261–262           
           solution-focusedapproachesinvolving,302–304,326,          
              332–333                                                
           structureandorganizationof,320–323,329–330                
          FamilyClusterprogram,337                                   
          FamilyEducationalRightsandPrivacyAct(FERPA), 38,           
              44,51–52                                               
          Familytherapy:                                             
           assessmentin,344                                          
           attachment-basedfamily therapyas,342                      
           beliefsystemsconsideredin,324–326,331–334,346             
           casestudyof,343–346                                       
           circularityconsideredin,325–326                           
           classroom/educationalapplicationsof,337–339,              
              343–346                                                
           cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesto,           
              130–131,139–140,388                                    
           culturalconsiderationsin, 322–323,326                     
           developmentalissuesin,321–322,335–336                     
           directivefamilyplaytherapyas,334–335                      
           disability-relatedinterventions as,380,382–383,           
              388–389                                                
           educationandtraining in, 319–320                          
           efficacyof,339–342                                        
           family-centered problem-solvingintervention as,           
              382–383                                                
           functional familytherapyas,340–341                        
           genderissuesin, 322–323                                   
           groupproceduresfor,336–337,388–389                        
           historicalperspectiveon,318–320                           
           homeworkassignmentsin, 330                                
           interactional patternsconsideredin,323–324,325,           
              330–331                                                
           InternalFamilySystemsmodelof,327–328,335–336              
           journalson,319                                            
           MedicalFamilyTherapyas,328,336                            
           multidimensional familytherapyas,341–342                  
           multidimensional treatmentfostercareas,341                
           multisystemictherapyas,13–14,341                          
           narrativetherapyas,326,334                                
           overviewof,317–318,342–343                                
           parentcounselingandtraining in,336,341                    
                                       professionalassociationsrelatedto,319–320
                                       rational emotivebehaviortherapyas,188–190
                                       reality therapyas,252–253     
                                       resourceson,319,346–348       
                                       solution-focusedtherapiesas,326,332–333
                                       strategicfamily therapyas,323–324,330–331,340
                                       structuralfamily therapyas,320–323,329–330,340
                                       systemicapproachesas,13–14,317–346(see also
                                         Systemic approaches)        
                                       theoriesunderlying, 318,320–328
                                       therapeuticgoalsandtechniquesof,329–336,
                                         345–346                     
                                     Filialtherapy,93,97–98,102–103,105,108
                                     Freud,Anna,2,92                 
                                     Freud,Sigmund,2,92              
                                     Functionalbehavioralassessments,360–361
                                     Functionalfamilytherapy, 340–341
                                     Gays/lesbians,74                
                                     Genderissues,72,262,322–323     
                                     Generalsystemstheory, 318       
                                     Glasser,William,217             
                                     WilliamGlasserInstitute,220     
                                     GLBTindividuals,74              
                                     Goalsetting:                    
                                       child/adolescent perspectiveon,8–9
                                       inchild-centered playtherapy, 95–97,103
                                       incognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproaches,
                                         54,121                      
                                       inculturallyresponsiveinterpersonaltherapy, 70–71
                                       developmentalframeworkfor,6   
                                       indisability-related interventions,361,371
                                       infamily therapy, 330         
                                       inrational emotivebehaviortherapy,179,181–182,
                                         184,201–202                 
                                       inreality therapyapproaches, 230–231,237–238
                                       inschool-basedinterventions, 54
                                       insolution-focusedapproaches,286,293,307–308
                                     Grossv.Allen (1994),46          
                                     Grouptherapy:                   
                                       child-centered playtherapyas,92,102,103–104
                                       cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesin,
                                         129,135,141–142             
                                       confidentiality issuesin, 38–39,54
                                       disability-related interventionsincluding, 374,376,
                                         388–389                     
                                       rational emotivebehaviortherapyas,185–186,190,
                                         198                         
                                       reality therapyas,240–242,258,260–262
                                       research on,18                
                                       solution-focusedapproachesin,298–300
                                       systemicapproachesto,336–337,388–389(see also
                                         Familytherapy)              
                                     HandbookofPsychotherapy andBehaviorChange, 15
                                     Harrington,G.L.,217             
                                     HealthInsurancePortabilityandAccountabilityAct
                                         (HIPAA), 28,52–53

=== Page 428 (1 cols) ===
414   S                                                        
            UBJECT                                                   
                I                                                    
                NDEX                                                 
      Homicideattemptsandideation,41,45–46,47                        
      Homosexuality,74                                               
      Humanisticpsychotherapy, 376                                   
      IndividualswithDisabilities EducationImprovementAct            
           (IDEA), 3,32,44,53,54,365,372,384                         
      Inference chaining, 179–180                                    
      Informedconsent,28,32–33,34,35,41–42,49–51                     
      InstituteforAdvancedStudyinRationalPsychotherapy,              
           158,186                                                   
      InstituteforRealityTherapy,218,220                             
      Insurance coverage,286                                         
      Intellectual/developmental disabilities:                       
        assessmentoridentification of,365                            
        children/adolescents withdisabilitieswith,298,306,           
           359,365–371,390                                           
        cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesto,              
           367–370                                                   
        comorbidconditionswith,359,366–367,368–370                   
        medicationfor,370                                            
        parenttraining relatedto,368                                 
        prevalence of,365                                            
        progressmonitoringof,370–371                                 
        resourceson,390                                              
        solution-focusedapproachesfor,298,306,370                    
        therapeuticapproachesto,367–370                              
      Internal FamilySystemsmodel,327–328,335–336                    
      International FamilyTherapyAssociation,319,320                 
      International JournalofChoice TheoryandRealityTherapy,         
           220                                                       
      Internet-orcomputer-basedissues:                               
        computerizedCBT treatmentsas,136–137                         
        confidentiality risksas,39,52–53                             
        legal issuesrelatedto,52–53                                  
        rationalemotivebehaviortherapygameand                        
           technology inclusionas,184,198,199                        
      Interpersonalpsychotherapy:                                    
        child/adolescent applicationof,66–67                         
        culturallyresponsive,61–86                                   
      Interpreters,40–41                                             
      Interventions. SeeChild/adolescent counseling and              
           psychotherapy                                             
      James,William, 280                                             
      Joining, 329,337–338                                           
      JournalofRealityTherapy, 220,264                               
      Juveniledelinquency. SeeDelinquent behavior                    
      Kelsonv.CityofSpringfield (1985), 47                           
      Klein, Melanie, 2                                              
      Latino/a Americans, 68–69,76,81–82,106                         
      Learning disabilities:                                         
        assessmentoridentification of,83,372                         
        children/adolescents withdisabilitieswith,53,83,             
           196,200,371–377,385,390                                   
                                   cognitive-behavioralandbehavioralapproachesto,
                                      374,375–376                    
                                   comorbidconditionswith,372,373–374,376,385
                                   groupcounselingfor,374,376        
                                   humanisticpsychotherapyfor,376    
                                   mindfulnesstraining for,376       
                                   parenttrainingrelatedto,375       
                                   prevalenceof,371–372              
                                   progressmonitoringof,376          
                                   REBTforresponseto,196,200         
                                   resourceson,390                   
                                   school-basedinterventions for,53,83,200,371–377
                                   socialskillstraining for,375,376  
                                   solution-focusedapproachesfor,374–375
                                   therapeuticapproachesto,53,196,200,373–376
                                  Legalissues:                       
                                   childabusereportingas,48–49       
                                   confidentialityandprivilegeas,38,43–49,54
                                   dutytoinformas,46–47              
                                   dutytowarnas,45–46,47–49          
                                   ethicalissuedistinctionfrom,26–27,28,42,48,50,55
                                   informedconsentas,49–51           
                                   medicationtrialsas,50–51          
                                   overviewofimportanceof,26,42–43,55
                                   parentalrightsandresponsibilitiesas,36,44,49–52
                                   recordsaccessandprivacyas,38,44–45,51–53
                                  Lesbians/gays, 74                  
                                  MedicalFamilyTherapy(MedFT),328,336
                                  Medicalhealth issues,328,336,337,340,341,343–345,
                                      384–389.SeealsoDisabilities, children and
                                      adolescentswith                
                                  Medication, 42,50–51,126,370       
                                  Mentalhealth issues:               
                                   anxietyas(see Anxietyandanxietydisorders)
                                   assessmentof(see Assessmentanddiagnosis)
                                   attentiondeficithyperactivity disorderas,5,51,97,
                                      141,372,374,376,379            
                                   autismspectrumdisordersas,5,358–365,389–390
                                   behavioralandconductdisordersas(see Behavioral
                                      andconductdisorders)           
                                   bipolardisorderas,360             
                                   chronicnatureof,3–5               
                                   depressionas(seeDepressionanddepressivedisorders)
                                   eatingdisordersas,46,141,142,196,321,340
                                   obsessive-compulsivedisorderas,124,129–131,196,
                                      360,364                        
                                   posttraumaticstressdisorderas,124,134–135,140,
                                      141,143–147,380                
                                   schizophrenia as,282,318          
                                   socialphobiaas,17,131–134,191,197 
                                   substanceabuseas,4,5,196,282,298,341–342
                                   suicideattemptsandideationas,5,41–42,46–47,74,
                                      135–136                        
                                   treatmentof(see Child/adolescent counseling and
                                      psychotherapy)                 
                                  Mentalhealth professionals.SeeTherapistsand
                                      counselors

=== Page 429 (1 cols) ===
Subject Index 415  
                                                                     
          Mental ResearchInstitute(MRI), 280,318                     
          Milliganetal.v.CityofSlidall(2000), 47                     
          Mindfulness training, 123,376                              
          Minorityculturalissues.SeeCulturalissues;specific          
              minoritygroups                                         
          Minuchin, Salvador,329                                     
          Minuchin CenterfortheFamily,329                            
          Miracle questions,291–293,332–333                          
          Mirandav.BoardofEducationoftheCityofNew York               
              (1994),47                                              
          Multiculturalissues.See Culturalissues                     
          Multidimensional familytherapy(MDFT), 341–342              
          Multidimensional treatmentfostercare,341                   
          Multimodalandmultisystemicapproaches,12–14,341.            
              SeealsoSystemic approaches                             
          Multisystemictherapy(MST), 13–14,341                       
          Narrativetherapy,326,334                                   
          NationalAssociationofSchoolPsychologists (NASP),           
              27,33,34,40,50,53                                      
          NationalCouncilonFamilyRelations,320                       
          NativeAmericans,79–80                                      
          Nonverbalcommunication,75,100                              
          Normalization,130                                          
          NurturingParent Program,336                                
          Obsessive-compulsivedisorder(OCD), 124,129–131,            
              196,360,364                                            
          Online issues.SeeInternet-orcomputer-basedissues           
          Page v.Rotterdam-Mohonasen Central SchoolDistrict          
              (1982), 52                                             
          Parent-Child InteractionTherapy(PCIT), 368                 
          Parentcounseling andskillstraining. SeealsoFamily          
              therapy                                                
           child-centered playtherapyincluding, 93,103,              
              104–105,108                                            
           cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesto,           
              141,142,364–365,375                                    
           disability-relatedsupportincluding, 358,364–365,          
              368,375,382–383                                        
           familytherapyincluding, 336,341                           
           NurturingParent Programas,336                             
           Parent-Child InteractionTherapyas,368                     
           ParentInvolvementProgramas,250–252,257–258                
           rationalemotivebehaviortherapyincluding,                  
              187–191,198,200,202                                    
           RationalPositiveParenting as,190,198                      
           realitytherapyapproachesto,250–252,257–258,               
              261–262                                                
           solution-focusedapproachesto,302                          
           stressmanagement as,383                                   
          ParentInvolvementProgram(PIP), 250–252,                    
              257–258                                                
          Parents.SeeFamiliesandparents                              
          ParentsAgainstAbuseinSchoolsv.WilliamsportArea             
              School District(1991), 52                              
                                     Personality:                    
                                       cognition influencedby,115–116
                                       developmentalissuesrelateto,6,10
                                       psychoanalysis on,91–92       
                                       subpersonalities,327–328,335–336
                                     Pesce v.J.SterlingMortonHighSchool District201(1987),
                                         48                          
                                     Pharmacological treatments,42,50–51,126,370
                                     PhyllisP.v.Claremont UnifiedSchool District(1986), 38,
                                         48                          
                                     Physicaldisabilities. SeealsoMedical healthissues
                                       children/adolescents withdisabilitieswith,384–389,
                                         391                         
                                       cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesto,
                                         386–388                     
                                       comorbidconditionswith,385,387
                                       copingskillstherapiesrelatedto,387
                                       family andparentissueswith,385–386,388–389
                                       family therapyrelatedto,388–389
                                       problemsolvingtraining relatedto,387
                                       relaxation trainingrelatedto,386–387
                                       resourceson,391               
                                       therapeuticapproachesto,386–389
                                     Piaget’stheoryofcognitivedevelopment,6–7,125
                                     Playtherapy:                    
                                       child-centered, 2–3,91–109    
                                       directivefamilyplaytherapyas,334–335
                                       filialtherapyincluding, 93,97–98,102–103,105,
                                         108                         
                                       historyandstatusof,2–3,91–93  
                                     Posttraumaticstressdisorder(PTSD):
                                       cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesto,
                                         124,134–135,140,141,143–147 
                                       comorbidconditionswith,134    
                                       traumaticbraininjuryresponseincluding, 380
                                     Privacy, 38,44–45,51–53         
                                     Privilege.See Confidentialityandprivilege
                                     Problemsolving:                 
                                       cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproaches
                                         including, 120,122,126,127,132,136,138,
                                         145,387                     
                                       culturallyresponsiveinterpersonaltherapyincluding,
                                         71–76                       
                                       family-centered problem-solvinginterventionas,
                                         382–383                     
                                       rational emotivebehaviortherapypractical solutions
                                         including, 175–177,177–178  
                                       reality therapyapproachesincluding, 244–245
                                       SOLVE modelof,387             
                                     Psychoanalysis, 2,91–92,116–117,318
                                     Psychoeducation:                
                                       cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproaches
                                         including, 123,127,129–130,131,133,134,
                                         136,140,145,364–365         
                                       rational emotivebehaviortherapyas,156,186,199
                                     Psychotherapy.SeeChild/adolescent counseling and
                                         psychotherapy               
                                     Punishmentavoidance, 233–235,248,271

=== Page 430 (1 cols) ===
416   S                                                        
            UBJECT                                                   
                I                                                    
                NDEX                                                 
      Racialandethnic culturalissues. SeeCulturalissues;             
           specific minoritygroups                                   
      Rationalemotivebehaviortherapy(REBT):                          
        13stepsof,178–181                                            
        adaptiveandmaladaptiveemotionsin,161–162                     
        foradolescents,specifically, 184–185                         
        assessmentin,188–189                                         
        awfulizing in,165,166,167,169,171                            
        casestudyof,200–205                                          
        CBT foundationsof,115,155                                    
        forchildren, specifically, 183–184                           
        classical vs.general, 155                                    
        classroom/educationalapplicationsof,186–187,197,             
           199                                                       
        demandingness in,163,164,166–169,171,173                     
        developmentalissuesconsideredin,181,184–185                  
        disputingirrationalbeliefsin,180–181,184–185                 
        distinctivefeaturesof,156–157                                
        educationandtraining in,158                                  
        efficacy of,192–199                                          
        elegant vs.inelegant solutionsin,177–178                     
        familial andparentalinvolvementin,187–191,198,               
           200,202,204–205                                           
        frustrationintolerancein,165,166,167,169–170,171             
        globalevaluationofhumanworthin, 165,167,                     
           170–171,173                                               
        goalsettingin,179,181–182,184,201–202                        
        groupsettingfor,185–186,190,198                              
        historyandstatusof,157–158                                   
        homeworkassignments in,181,191,205                           
        hypothesispresentationin, 180                                
        individualpsychotherapyas,181–185,189,190–191                
        inference chaining in,179–180                                
        insights developedin,178                                     
        irrationalbeliefs andemotionaldisturbancein,                 
           163–166,167,171–173                                       
        overviewof,155–157,199–200                                   
        philosophical assumptionsof,158–159                          
        practicalvs. emotionalsolutionsin,175–177                    
        primaryandsecondarydisturbancesin,173                        
        principlesof,160–161                                         
        RationalPositiveParenting basedon,190,198                    
        religiousversionsof,156–157                                  
        research supportfor,171,173                                  
        resourceson,158,205–207                                      
        RETMANrationalstoriesin,184,198,199                          
        self-acceptance vs. self-esteemin,170–171,173                
        stressmanagement programincluding, 187                       
        theoretical assumptionsof,159–161                            
        therapeuticrelationship developmentin, 174–175,              
           182,188                                                   
        therapeuticstrategiesandtechniquesin,174–199                 
        unconditional acceptance in,174–175                          
        valuesof,159–160                                             
        view ofpsychopathologyin,161–173                             
      Realitytherapyapproaches:                                      
        10-stepdisciplineplanas,245–250                              
        toacting out/behaviorissues,217–218,225,229,242,             
           244–250,253–254,258–263                                   
                                   basictheoryandassumptionsof,221–224
                                   bibliotherapyin,239–240           
                                   casestudiesof,219,245–250,266–271 
                                   CBTfoundationsof,115              
                                   choicetheoryunderlying, 220,223–224,236–240,
                                      263–264                        
                                   classroom/educationalapplicationsof,217–218,
                                      243–250,253,254–257,258–264,266–271
                                   commitmenttoplanin,231–232,245,268–270
                                   confrontationin,238               
                                   contractsin,232,238,248,268,269   
                                   controltheoryunderlying, 219–220,222–223
                                   counselingenvironment for,236–237 
                                   criticismin,233,235               
                                   todepressionandwithdrawal,224–225,229
                                   developmentalissuesconsideredin,242,262
                                   educationandtraining in,218,220,261,263
                                   efficacyof,253–265                
                                   excuseavoidancein, 232–233,270    
                                   familyinterventions in,252–253    
                                   freedomin, 222,243,262            
                                   funandenjoyment in,221,222,243,262
                                   genderissuesconsideredin,262      
                                   groupproceduresfor,240–242,258,260–262
                                   historyandstatusof,217–220        
                                   homeworkassignmentsin,239         
                                   humorin,238                       
                                   identitydevelopmentin, 218,221,225
                                   individualpsychotherapyas,227–236 
                                   informationin,239                 
                                   instructionin,239                 
                                   involvementoftherapistin,227–228,240,241,
                                      267–268,271                    
                                   loveandbelonging in,221,222,226,243,262
                                   overviewof,265–266                
                                   paradoxin,240                     
                                   parentingskillstraining in,250–252,257–258,
                                      261–262                        
                                   persistencein,235–236             
                                   planning responsiblebehaviorin,230–231,237–238,
                                      241,244–245,247–248,268–270,271
                                   power/senseofimportancein, 221,243,262
                                   presentbehaviorfocusin, 228–229,237,241
                                   punishmentavoidancein,233–235,248,271
                                   questioningin,240,247             
                                   resourceson,272–273               
                                   restitutionin, 240                
                                   roleplaying in,239                
                                   SchoolswithoutFailureas,218,258   
                                   self-disclosurein, 240            
                                   tosickness,225–226                
                                   summarizingin,228,231,240         
                                   supportin,239                     
                                   theoriesunderlying, 219–224       
                                   therapeuticgoalsandtechniquesin, 226–227,
                                      237–240                        
                                   therapeuticrelationshipsin,227–228,235–236,
                                      236–237,240,241,266–268,271

=== Page 431 (1 cols) ===
Subject Index 417  
                                                                     
           tothinking disturbances,225                               
           valuejudgmentin, 229–230,231,232–233,266,271              
           viewofpsychopathologyin,224–227                           
          Recordsmanagement, 38,39,44–45,51–53                       
          Reflection,100,107,108                                     
          Reframing, 126,134,177,331–332,338–339,346,388             
          Relapseprevention,121,128                                  
          Relaxationtraining, 123,126,128,132,134,363,               
              386–387                                                
          Religionandspirituality,78–79,82,156–157                   
          Research:                                                  
           effectsizedeterminationsin,18–19                          
           efficacystudiesin(see Efficacy oftreatments;              
              Evidence-basedtreatments)                              
           historicalandtraditionalreviewsof,14–18                   
           meta-analyses of,18–20                                    
          Rogers,Carl, 2–3                                           
          Roleplaying:                                               
           cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproaches              
              including, 122,123,124,126,128,133,138,                
              141,362                                                
           culturallyresponsiveinterpersonaltherapyincluding,        
              76                                                     
           rationalemotivebehaviortherapyincluding, 191,             
              204–205                                                
           realitytherapyapproachesincluding, 239                    
          Safetyplanning, 135                                        
          Schizophrenia, 282,318                                     
          School-basedinterventions:                                 
           10-stepdisciplineplanas,245–250                           
           child-centered playtherapyas,105–106                      
           childteacherrelationship trainingas,105,106               
           chronicmental healthneedsnecessitating, 4                 
           classroommeetingsas,243–245,255–257,264                   
           cognitive-behavioral andbehavioralapproachesto,           
              53–54,141                                              
           counselorcompetence for,29–30                             
           counselorprivatepracticewithclients from,30–31            
           culturallyresponsiveinterpersonaltherapyas,82–85          
           disability-relatedinterventions as,53,83,200,299,         
              357,365,371–377,379,380–381                            
           ethical issueswith,29–42,53–54                            
           evidence-based,53                                         
           goalsettingin,54                                          
           groupsettingfor,39,141                                    
           historicalperspectiveson,3                                
           IndividualswithDisabilitiesEducationImprovement           
              Acton,3,32,44,53,54,365,372,384                        
           learning disabilitiesaddressedin,53,83,200,371–377        
           legalissueswith,44–53                                     
           medicationin,51                                           
           parentalrolein/consentfor,32–33,34,35–37,41–42,           
              44,49–51                                               
           rationalemotivebehaviortherapyas,186–187,197,             
              199                                                    
           realitytherapyapproachesas,217–218,243–250,253,           
              254–257,258–264,266–271                                
                                       schoolphobia/refusalnecessitating, 17,133–134
                                       SchoolswithoutFailureas,218,258
                                       schoolviolencenecessitating, 41,47
                                       solution-focusedapproachesas,282,300–304,306
                                       systemicapproachesto,337–339,343–346
                                       traumaticbraininjuryand,379,380–381
                                     Schoolphobia,17,133–134         
                                     Self-esteemvs.self-acceptance, 170–171,173
                                     Self-instructional training, 115
                                     Self-monitoring, 122–123,127    
                                     Self-regulation/self-management, 123,127,363
                                     Sexuality:                      
                                       adolescent sexualidentity, 72,74
                                       ethical issuesrelatedto,42    
                                       sexualabuse,143–147,282       
                                       sexualorientation,74          
                                     Socialphobia,17,131–134,191,197 
                                     Socialskillstraining, 132,138,141,362,375,376,383
                                     SocialStories                   
                                           &                         
                                            ,362,363                 
                                     SocietyofClinical Psychology, 20
                                     Socioeconomicstatus,75,106      
                                     Socraticquestioning,121         
                                     Solution-focusedapproaches:     
                                       basictheoryandassumptionsof,282–285
                                       casestudiesof,291–292,297–298,299–300,307–309
                                       change andfluctuationawarenessin, 284
                                       classroomandparentapplicationsof,282,300–304,
                                         306                         
                                       collaborationenhancing change in,282–283,
                                         287–288                     
                                       complimenting clientsin, 296,297
                                       developmentalissuesconsideredin, 287
                                       diagnosisavoidancein, 285–286 
                                       dialogue/language importancein,281,283–284
                                       disability-related interventionsas,298,306,370,
                                         374–375                     
                                       effectiveness researchon,304–307
                                       exceptionsfocusin, 294–295,296–297,299,
                                         308–309,333                 
                                       family therapyas,326,332–333  
                                       feedbackmessagesin,297–298,308
                                       futuresolutionsvs.pastproblemsfocusin, 281,283
                                       groupworkincluding, 298–300   
                                       historyandstatusof,280–282    
                                       miracle questionsin,291–293,332–333
                                       overviewof,279–280,307        
                                       postmodernthinking/social constructionism
                                         underlying, 281,326         
                                       pragmaticphilosophyof,284–285 
                                       previoussolutions/theoriesexplorationin, 288–289
                                       questionsaskedin,289–295,299,307,332–333
                                       resourceson,310               
                                       rippleeffectin,284            
                                       solution-focusedbrieftherapyas,280–281,305–306,
                                         333,370,374–375             
                                       strengths-basedapproachin,284–285,296
                                       TakingCharge programas,302    
                                       theoriesunderlying, 281,282–286,326

=== Page 432 (1 cols) ===
418   S                                                        
            UBJECT                                                   
                I                                                    
                NDEX                                                 
      Solution-focusedapproaches(continued)                          
        therapeuticgoalsandinterventionsin,286–298                   
        view ofpsychopathologyin,285–286                             
        WOWWprogramas,301–302                                        
      Solution-FocusedBriefTherapyAssociation(SFBTA),                
           281                                                       
      SOLVE model,387                                                
      Somaticcomplaints/management, 127,136,142,                     
           225–226,340                                               
      Stagesofchange model,181–182                                   
      Strategic familytherapy, 323–324,330–331,340                   
      Stressmanagement, 134,140,187,383.Seealso                      
           Relaxationtraining                                        
      Structuralfamilytherapy, 320–323,329–330,340                   
      Substanceabuse,4,5,196,282,298,341–342                         
      Suicideattemptsandideation, 5,41–42,46–47,74,                  
           135–136                                                   
      Supersedingconfidentiality andprivilege:                       
        childabuseconcernssuperseding,37–38,48–49                    
        dutytoinformsuperseding,46–47                                
        dutytowarnsuperseding,45–46,47–49                            
        ethical issuesof,28–29,35,37–39,48                           
        grouptherapyissuesof,38–39,54                                
        Internet-orcomputer-basedrisksto,39,52–53                    
        legal issuesof,38,43–49,54                                   
        privilegevs. confidentialitydistinction, 43,48               
      SurvivingCancer CompetentlyInterventionProgram                 
           (SCCIP), 388                                              
      Systemic approaches:                                           
        assessmentin,344                                             
        attachment-based familytherapyas,342                         
        beliefsystemsconsideredin, 324–326,331–334,346               
        casestudyof,343–346                                          
        circularityconsideredin, 325–326                             
        classroom/educationalapplicationsof,337–339,                 
           343–346                                                   
        culturalconsiderationsin,322–323,326                         
        developmentalissuesin, 321–322,335–336                       
        directivefamilyplaytherapyas,334–335                         
        educationandtraining in,319–320                              
        efficacy of,339–342                                          
        family therapyas,13–14,317–346(seealsoFamily                 
           therapy)                                                  
        functional familytherapyas,340–341                           
        genderissuesin,322–323                                       
        general systemstheoryunderlying, 318                         
        groupproceduresfor,336–337,388–389                           
        historicalperspectiveon,318–320                              
        homeworkassignments in,330                                   
        interactional patternsconsideredin, 323–324,325,             
           330–331                                                   
        Internal FamilySystemsmodelas,327–328,335–336                
        joining in,329,337–338                                       
        journalson,319                                               
        Medical FamilyTherapyas,328,336                              
        multidimensional familytherapyas,341–342                     
        multidimensional treatmentfostercareas,341                   
        multisystemictherapyas,13–14,341                             
        narrativetherapyas,326,334                                   
                                   overviewof,317–318,342–343        
                                   parentcounselingandtraining in,336,341
                                   professionalassociationsrelatedto,319–320
                                   reframingin, 331–332,338–339,346  
                                   resourceson,319,346–348           
                                   solution-focusedtherapiesas,326,332–333
                                   strategicfamilytherapyas,323–324,330–331,340
                                   structuralfamilytherapyas,320–323,329–330,340
                                   theoriesunderlying, 318,320–328   
                                   therapeuticgoalsandtechniquesof,329–336,
                                      345–346                        
                                  TakingCharge program,302           
                                  Tarasoffv.Regents oftheUniversityofCalifornia (1976),
                                      45–46,47,48                    
                                  Therapeuticrelationships:          
                                   adolescentchallenges to,11–12     
                                   child-centered playtherapygoalsfor,95–97,99,101,
                                      109                            
                                   culturallyresponsive,64–66        
                                   rationalemotivebehaviortherapyfocuson,174–175,
                                      182,188                        
                                   realitytherapyapproachto,227–228,235–236,
                                      236–237,240,241,266–268,271    
                                   solution-focusedapproachesto,282–283,287–288
                                   systemicapproachfocuson,329,337–338
                                   unconditionalacceptance/positive regardin,96,
                                      174–175                        
                                  Therapistsandcounselors:           
                                   competenceof,29–30,39,62–66       
                                   culturalissuesimpacting(see Culturalissues)
                                   educationandtraining of,29–30,39,158,218,220,
                                      261,263,319–320                
                                   ethicalissuesfor(see Ethicalissues)
                                   legalissuesfor(seeLegal issues)   
                                   multiplerelationships of,31       
                                   professionalrelationshipsandcommunicationamong,
                                      29,357–358,370                 
                                   self-awarenessof,65               
                                   self-disclosureby, 240            
                                   therapeuticrelationshipwith(seeTherapeutic
                                      relationships)                 
                                   treatmentby(see Child/adolescent counseling and
                                      psychotherapy)                 
                                  Transgenderindividuals,74          
                                  Traumaticbraininjury:              
                                   children/adolescents withdisabilitieswith,377–383,
                                      390–391                        
                                   cognitive-behavioralandbehavioralapproachesto,
                                      380,382                        
                                   comorbidconditionswith,379–380,382
                                   familyandparentissuesrelatedto,381
                                   familytherapy/parent interventionfor,380,382–383
                                   hospitalizationfor,377,380        
                                   pathophysiologyandimpactof,377–379
                                   prevalenceof,377                  
                                   resourceson,390–391               
                                   schoolreentryafter, 380–381

=== Page 433 (1 cols) ===
Subject Index 419  
                                                                     
           socialinterventionsfor,383                                
           therapeuticapproachesto,380,381–383                       
          Treatments.SeeChild/adolescent counseling and              
              psychotherapy                                          
          Unconditional acceptance/positiveregard,96,174–175         
          Understanding Usprogram,337                                
                                                                     
          Valeriev.Derry CO-OPSchoolDistrict (1991), 51              
          Violence:                                                  
           domestic(see Childabuse;Domesticviolence)                 
           homicideattemptsandideationas,41,45–46,47                 
                                       school-based,41,47            
                                       suicideattemptsandideationas,5,41–42,46–47,74,
                                         135–136                     
                                     WhiteAmericans, 69              
                                     WilliamGlasserInstitute,220     
                                     Wittgenstein,Ludwig,280         
                                     WOWW(WorkingonWhatWorks)program,
                                         301–302                     
                                     YouCanDoItprogram,186–187       
                                     Youth. SeeChildren andadolescents

=== Page 434 (1 cols) ===
WILEY     END   USER     LICENSE     AGREEMENT                       
                                                                                    
     Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

