=== Page 1 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 2 (1 cols) ===
Table     of   Contents                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           Cover Page                                                               
           Title Page                                                               
                                                                                    
           Dedication                                                               
           ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                                                          
                                                                                    
           THE HOW   AND  WHY  OF THIS BOOK:  AN  INTRODUCTION                      
           one HOW  TO CONDUCT   THE  FIRST INTERVIEW   WITH  AN ADULT              
                                                                                    
           two LOOKING,  LISTENING,  AND  FEELING: THE  MENTAL   STATUS             
           EXAM                                                                     
                                                                                    
           three HOW TO THINK  ABOUT   YOUR  CLIENT’S  HEALTH:  THE                 
           MEDICAL   HISTORY                                                        
                                                                                    
           four HOW TO CONDUCT    THE FIRST INTERVIEW   WITH  A FAMILY              
           five HOW TO CONDUCT    THE FIRST INTERVIEW   WITH  A CHILD               
                                                                                    
           six HOW TO TAKE  A DEVELOPMENTAL      HISTORY                            
                                                                                    
           seven HOW TO  CONDUCT   THE  FIRST INTERVIEW   WITH  A COUPLE            
           eight HOW TO DETERMINE   WHETHER    A CLIENT  MIGHT  HURT                
           SOMEBODY—INCLUDING       YOU                                             
                                                                                    
           nine HOW TO DETERMINE    WHETHER   A  CLIENT MIGHT   HURT                
           HERSELF                                                                  
                                                                                    
           ten HOW TO DETERMINE    WHETHER   A CLIENT  IS A SUBSTANCE               
           ABUSER                                                                   
                                                                                    
           eleven HOW TO ASSESS  CHILDREN   FOR  NEGLECT,  ABUSE,  AND              
           SEXUAL  ABUSE                                                            
                                                                                    
           twelve WHAT PSYCHOLOGICAL     TESTING  IS AND WHEN   YOU                 
           MIGHT  ASK  FOR IT                                                       
                                                                                    
           thirteen HOW TO WRITE AN  ASSESSMENT                                     
           fourteen WHERE YOU  GO FROM   HERE                                       
                                                                                    
           INDEX                                                                    
           Copyright

=== Page 3 (1 cols) ===
OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 4 (1 cols) ===
Where                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                   to   Start                                       
                                                                                    
                                 and     What                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                     to  Ask                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                             An  Assessment  Handbook                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                    Susan Lukas                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 5 (1 cols) ===
For Kit, Megan and Gaby                              
                                                                                    
                            who make anything seem possible                         
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 6 (1 cols) ===
A                                                              
                        CKNOWLEDGMENTS                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           I                                                                        
             am grateful to many people for their help with this book. To my three  
           student readers: Diana Manchester, Tracy Vandenbergh, and Deirdre        
                                                                                    
           Maloney. To Maurice Elias, of the Rutgers University Department of       
           Psychology, for his kindness to a stranger. To Susan Donner, Director of 
                                                                                    
           Field Placement at Smith College School of Social Work for her thoughtful
           and astute comments. To Judith Rosenberger of the Hunter College School  
           of Social Work for her enthusiasm and encouragement and for allowing me  
                                                                                    
           the benefit of her students’ observations. To my publisher and editor, Susan
           Barrows Munro of W.W. Norton and Company, for her guidance, her vision,  
           and most of all, her regard for writers and the written word.            
                                                                                    
               Professionally, I have the good fortune to be surrounded by caring,  
           dedicated clinicians. At the Jewish Board of Family and Children’s Services
                                                                                    
           I am especially grateful for Patricia Nitzburg’s insight, her wit, her   
           forbearance, and her steady hand on the tiller, and for Annaclare Van    
           Dalen’s goodness, her brilliance, her profound understanding of human    
                                                                                    
           emotion, and her belief in me when I need it most. These two women and   
           Emily Shachter-whose wisdom and style I treasure-personify the           
                                                                                    
           professional standards to which I continue to aspire.                    
               Finally, I wish to acknowledge my abiding debt to Professor Charles  
           Guzzetta of the Hunter College School of Social Work who, from my first  
                                                                                    
           day in academia to the moment of this writing, remains an inspiration.   
           Without his intellectual rigor, his dedication to teaching and learning, his
           spirit of generosity, and his good old-fashioned work ethic, this book might
                                                                                    
           never have been written.                                                 
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 7 (1 cols) ===
T                                                            
                         HE                                                         
                                H                                                   
                                   OW      AND                                      
                                                    W                               
                                                        HY                          
                        OF                                                          
                              T                                                     
                                 HIS                                                
                                         B                                          
                                           OOK                                      
                                                    :  A                            
                                                          N                         
                           I                                                        
                             NTRODUCTION                                            
           W                                                                        
               ithin a few weeks after I began my field placement as a social work  
           student in an MSW program, I asked my supervisor what he thought was     
           the most essential feature of being a good beginning clinician. “First of all,”
           he said, “you gotta know your customer.” Glib as that phrase may sound, it
           embodies the highest principles of sound practice and useful intervention.
               Further, by helping me to focus on where to begin, it helped me not to
           feel anxious all the time, which is the way I felt on the day I asked my 
           supervisor that question, and which is the way I quickly discovered most of
           my fellow students also felt. To be sure, some of that anxiety is        
           unavoidable; some of it is quite useful in making sure that we don’t     
           overstep our knowledge or authority and that we turn to our supervisors for
           guidance.                                                                
               The degree to which we are able to present those supervisors with    
                                                                                    
           factual information about our clients,* as well as with our impressions, is
           the degree to which they can help us assemble that information into a    
           coherent understanding of the clients’ problems and needs. The purpose of
                                                                                    
           this book is nothing more nor less than to help you accomplish that      
           information-gathering in a concise, thorough, and systematic way-which   
           should also help diminish some of your anxiety.                          
                                                                                    
               The book is not going to provide you with all the “answers.” It will 
           provide you with numerous questions and describe the situations in which 
                                                                                    
           they might be asked. That does not mean that you are going to direct all of
           them to the client. Some you are going to ask of yourself after an interview.
           Some you are going to discuss with your supervisor. Some you may never   
                                                                                    
           have occasion to ask. The idea of this book is simply to have them available
           to you when and if you need them.

=== Page 8 (1 cols) ===
The time at which you are likely to need these questions most is what’s
           known in clinical parlance as the assessment phase. The purpose of the   
           assessment phase is to help you and your supervisor make an accurate     
                                                                                    
           diagnosis, on the basis of which you can then formulate a conscientious  
           treatment plan. In some agencies and institutions the assessment phase is
                                                                                    
           embodied in the protocol of the agency; that is, you will be expected, during
           the first series of interviews to producefrequently in writing*—some     
           statement of the nature of the presenting problem, a background history of
                                                                                    
           the client, a sense of the underlying pathology (if any), and some       
           preliminary judgment as to whether or not there is a match between the   
                                                                                    
           kinds of services your agency provides and the prospective client’s needs.
               No doubt this last paragraph has raised far more questions in your   
           mind than it has answered, first and foremost of which is: Am I going to be
                                                                                    
           expected to do this on my own? And the answer is no. You will get a great
           deal of help, most of all from your supervisor. In addition, much of the 
           content of your courses will be aimed specifically at assisting you in   
                                                                                    
           making these judgments.                                                  
               Unfortunately, little of this may occur before you actually start    
                                                                                    
           interviewing clients. And even after you start getting supervision, it is
           almost impossible to get as much help as you feel you need. Why?         
               First, because supervisors are busy people. They have their own case 
                                                                                    
           loads and frequently have other administrative responsibilities, as well as
           supervision of other students and staff, so they have to remember a great
                                                                                    
           deal about many cases. In addition, your time with your supervisor will be
           limited by your own schedule, so it is crucial for you to provide as much
           information as possible in the limited time you have together.           
                                                                                    
               Second, unless yours is an agency that permits you to audiotape your 
           interviews (and this practice raises some thorny ethical and clinical issues),
           it is unlikely that your supervisor will ever know exactly what happened in
                                                                                    
           an interview. You may write a process recording which recounts some, or  
           maybe even most, of what was said, maybe even how you felt or what the   
                                                                                    
           client was doing when he* said it. But, no matter how hard you try to    
           remember, some of it will be lost. In addition, it is entirely possible that
           your supervisor will never actually see that person (there are exceptions,
                                                                                    
           e.g., if the case is transferred to you from your supervisor, or if you work in

=== Page 9 (1 cols) ===
an institutional setting and clients are known to the staff), so your    
           supervisor must rely heavily on the information you provide.             
               So, for a while you are going to feel a great deal of anxiety when you
                                                                                    
           start an interview. You are going to be worrying about what you’re       
           supposed to do or say next, at the same time as you are trying to listen,
                                                                                    
           look, think, pay attention to what you are feeling, and make some sense out
           of all of it. In short, you are going to have to learn to tolerate the feeling of
           not knowing.                                                             
                                                                                    
               If that sounds abstract or philosophical, be assured that it is not. You
           are immediately going to be confronted in your interviews with clients who
                                                                                    
           are in pain, who frequently have experienced unthinkable deprivations in 
           their life, and who want-or appear to want-answers. And you are going to 
           feel an intense desire to act, to do, to be reassuring and to say something
                                                                                    
           that will instantaneously make them feel better. So why not do it?       
               The answer to that question is quite straightforward. In most cases, you
           don’t know the person to whom you are listening. You may have read a file
                                                                                    
           on that person. You may have been given some information about his       
           background. But you have no idea what makes him tick. You may have       
                                                                                    
           some hunches, but you don’t know what his life is like, what comforts him,
           what frightens him. Therefore, you have no way of judging how your client
           will use the information or advice you might be inclined to offer. In the best
                                                                                    
           case, your helpful comments might be ignored or give false reassurance in a
           situation that needs to be better understood. In the worst case they may be
                                                                                    
           dangerous to him or those around him. The purpose in saying this is not to
           scare you; it is to move you in the direction of thinking about each client as
           unique, of recognizing that the human psyche is subtle, complex, and to be
                                                                                    
           regarded with the utmost respect.                                        
               Having said all this, having posed these dilemmas and restrictions on
           the help you can obtain from others, we come to why this book has been   
                                                                                    
           written. It is intended to help you resist the impulse to formulate premature
           hypotheses, to help you withstand some of the feelings of helplessness and
                                                                                    
           frustration that come from waiting and not knowing, and to give you some 
           guidelines for discovering who the person sitting before you really is. It is
           going to give you some direction for conducting different types of       
                                                                                    
           interviews, as well as some standardized tools for making an assessment. It
           will point you in the direction of what you need to know and how to

=== Page 10 (1 cols) ===
discover it and give you some clues as to where to look next. All this is
           intended to help you produce a document that you, your supervisor, and the
           treatment team can use to answer one crucial question: How do you respond
                                                                                    
           to this particular client in a way that is truly therapeutic?            
               Before we begin the assessment phase, a few more words about the     
                                                                                    
           book and its orientation. First, it is written as if you were working in a
           community mental health clinic serving a culturally and ethnically diverse
           population of men, women, and children. Therefore, you may find at times 
                                                                                    
           that you need to adapt the material to your clinical setting and the unique
           circumstances and characteristics of your clients.                       
                                                                                    
               Second, though my own training is psychodynamically oriented and     
           there may be unintentional indications of that in the text from time to time,
           the book is not meant to reflect any particular theoretical perspective on
                                                                                    
           how to do treatment. Every professional school and every discipline is   
           different. Individual professors have their own beliefs as to what works and
           what doesn’t when it comes to treatment modalities (e.g., group, individual
                                                                                    
           counseling, family intervention) and you probably have your own          
           inclinations as well. A school or its faculty may reflect the dominance of
                                                                                    
           one theoretician or another (e.g., classical Freudian thinking, self     
           psychology, object relations, behaviorism, or a combination of these and 
           many others). However, regardless of your orientation or your school’s,  
                                                                                    
           responsible and thorough assessment is crucial.                          
               If you are experiencing doubts about your own ability to tolerate not
                                                                                    
           knowing long enough to do a thorough assessment, two final pieces of     
           information might be useful.                                             
               This one may seem obvious but it is easily forgotten when you are    
                                                                                    
           face-to-face with your first client: Remember that the person who is sitting
           opposite you has probably had these problems for a very long time. Even if
           the person is a child or you are responding to a recent trauma or you are
                                                                                    
           working with a family, the intrapsychic and interpersonal characteristics
           have been there awhile. Change is going to take time. You are neither a  
                                                                                    
           miracle worker nor a magician, and what you are embarking on is a mutual 
           task, one in which you and the client (or clients) are going to work together
           to understand what parts of the present approach to the problem are useful
                                                                                    
           and what parts aren’t. However, implicit in that mutual effort is your   
           understanding that the client has developed, or was endowed with, some

=== Page 11 (1 cols) ===
strengths for coping with those problems. It is vitally important that in
           doing your assessment you discover those strengths and help the client to
           recognize and build on them. If you doubt the existence of those strengths
                                                                                    
           when you are confronted with your first client, remember that-no matter  
           how disturbed he may seem-he is talking, working, playing, eating, and   
                                                                                    
           somehow going on with his life. Also remember that, even if that person  
           seems unable to function, there is some small part of him that wishes to be
           healthy or he wouldn’t be alive.                                         
                                                                                    
               Lastly, if you aren’t already, at some point you are going to feel   
           overwhelmed with questions about your right to be practicing and learning
                                                                                    
           on your clients. At such moments it is important to remember that you    
           probably have a smaller case load than the regular workers in the agency 
           and, therefore, more time to devote to each of your clients. Furthermore,
                                                                                    
           your caring, your dedication, and your interest will go a long way toward
           building a relationship with a client, and that relationship is the cornerstone
           on which every client’s experience of being helped rests.                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           *Since I am trained as a social worker, I will refer throughout this book to
                                                                                    
           those being served as clients. Depending on the setting in which you train,
           or your profession, you may be more accustomed to referring to them as   
           patients.                                                                
                                                                                    
           *This written document may be referred to in your agency as an assessment,
           or a comprehensive assessment, or a diagnostic assessment, or any of a   
           number of other names. Again, since I am trained as a social worker, it will
                                                                                    
           be referred to here as a biopsychosocial assessment.                     
           *Hereafter, the client’s gender will be “she” in odd-numbered chapters and
                                                                                    
           “he” in even-numbered chapters. In all chapters the therapist will be    
           referred to as “she.” These designations do not always reflect statistical
           correctness, logical correctness, or political correctness. They are simply
                                                                                    
           intended to make the book easier to read. Obviously, you will substitute the
           appropriate pronoun when your judgment and experience indicate you       
                                                                                    
           should do so.                                                            
               In those chapters that refer to “parents,” it is hoped that your common
           sense will again prevail, and you will remind yourself that a child is not
                                                                                    
           always parented by his or her biological parents, nor by two people of   
           opposite sexes, nor even necessarily by two parents at all.

=== Page 12 (1 cols) ===
OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 13 (1 cols) ===
one                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
             H                                                                      
                OW      TO                                                          
                              C                                                     
                                 ONDUCT            THE                              
                                                            F                       
                                                              IRST                  
               I                                                                    
                NTERVIEW              WITH        AN                                
                                                        A                           
                                                           DULT                     
           W                                                                        
               e are now ready to begin addressing the first interview. The book will
           describe many such “first interviews,” aimed at different client         
           configurations and various types of issues; however, regardless of the   
           configuration, your goals in a first interview are always the same:      
               First, to allow the client to tell you her own story in her own words.
               You may have voluminous documents that you have read before your     
                                                                                    
               first interview; however, it is still crucial that you hear-or elicit-the
               client’s understanding of why she is there and what she thinks the   
               problem is. This does not in any way imply that you necessarily      
                                                                                    
               accept, or even agree with, the client’s interpretation or definition. It
               simply means that you want to hear it from her.                      
               Second, to let the client know that you understand what she believes,
                                                                                    
               even if it is her belief that she does not need to be there. This involves
               listening carefully to what the client is telling you and acknowledging
               it by something as simple as saying, “Are you saying that you are    
                                                                                    
               having difficulty in your relationship with your husband?” Or, “Maybe
               you’re saying that you would really rather not be here.”             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               The client’s realization that you are an interested listener and that you
           are making an effort to understand her is the essential first step in engaging
           any client in treatment. If you disagree with the client’s perception of the
                                                                                    
           problem, this is not the time to say so. Depending on the nature of the  
           treatment (e.g., family therapy), you may restate the family’s perception of
                                                                                    
           the problem using a different framework, but that will be taken up in the
           chapter on the first family interview. For now, just remember that the

=== Page 14 (1 cols) ===
overriding purpose of any first interview is to listen and to let the client
           know that you are trying to understand.                                  
               With that premise in mind let us go on to the first interview with an
                                                                                    
           adult. This chapter might have been called “The First Interview with the 
           Self-Referred Adult,” because what it focuses on is the client who comes 
                                                                                    
           because she herself recognizes a need to explore the possibility of therapy.
           The operative words are “explore the possibility.” What that means is that
           the person feels she needs help with a problem. It doesn’t mean she      
                                                                                    
           necessarily knows how to define the problem she is struggling with; it   
           doesn’t mean she necessarily knows what therapy is or whether it can help
                                                                                    
           her with the problem; and it certainly doesn’t mean that she necessarily 
           wants you to be her therapist. Helping a client with all those things is part
           of your job. But before you can begin-in fact, before that person walks  
                                                                                    
           through the door-you must prepare yourself.                              
               In many agencies part of your preparation will be reading some       
           documentation on the client. That may be nothing more than a two-line    
                                                                                    
           summary of the problem the client has reported and a telephone number    
           you can call to set up an appointment. On the other hand, if the case is 
                                                                                    
           being transferred to you, it may mean a huge file that includes a medical
           history, a psychiatric evaluation, a mental status exam, a biopsychosocial
           assessment by a previous clinician (or clinicians), that clinician’s progress
                                                                                    
           notes, a report of psychological testing, a diagnostic code, and many other
           types of information.                                                    
                                                                                    
               Whether it is one page or fifty, though, your response ought to be the
           same: What don’t I know that I need to know? Start making some written   
           notes for yourself, beginning with those questions that you need to have 
                                                                                    
           answered before you call the client back to arrange an appointment. For  
           instance, you may want further clarification of her current problem, if  
           possible, so you can be sure she is coming to the right place. You may want
                                                                                    
           to find out if anyone told her there is a fee charged. Or, if the case appears
           to involve more than one person, you may want to inquire about who       
                                                                                    
           should be included in the first interview. You should raise those questions
           with your supervisor or with the person who had the initial phone contact.

=== Page 15 (1 cols) ===
WHAT      TO   ASK    YOUR     SUPERVISOR                          
                                                                                    
                  BEFORE       YOUR      FIRST    INTERVIEW                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            1. Any questions raised by your reading of the client’s case            
                                                                                    
                record.                                                             
            2. Whom  to include in the first interview.                             
            3. How long the session should last.                                    
                                                                                    
            4. How often you should see the client.                                 
            5. How to introduce yourself.                                           
                                                                                    
            6. When and how to record the contents of the first interview.          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Then, if you have voluminous records to read, start by asking yourself
           what’s missing. If there are no medical records, why not? (You will find 
                                                                                    
           more on the importance of medical information in Chapter Three.) If that 
           person was seen at another agency, were the records requested and have   
           they arrived? If the person is taking medication, what kind, how much, and
                                                                                    
           who’s giving it to her? Start taking notes about the basic facts: age,   
           ethnicity, who’s in the family, presenting problem, I.Q. scores, diagnosis,
           etc. Begin to build a profile on that person in your mind, ask questions, do
                                                                                    
           your homework-and then add a healthy dose of skepticism to everything    
           you’ve found out.                                                        
                                                                                    
               Why? Because your job is to find out who that person really is, and the
           information in a file is only as useful and accurate as the competence and
           insight of the people reporting it. For example, I.Q. scores can easily be
                                                                                    
           affected by the client’s mental state when the testing was done. Diagnoses
           often vary depending on the clinician, the purpose of the diagnosis, and the
                                                                                    
           circumstances under which the client was seen. Intake information may    
           have been taken in English, while the client’s first language is Spanish, or
           Chinese, or Farsi. The medical information may include only an emergency 
                                                                                    
           room visit at a local hospital and not the records of the client’s primary care
           physician. In addition, what you are reading may reflect another clinician’s
           inexperience or prejudice or hostility toward a client. Since you don’t know

=== Page 16 (1 cols) ===
what factors are at work, it is important to be aware of the inconsistencies in
           the record and to wonder about them.                                     
               If you are supposed to telephone the client, remember that your      
                                                                                    
           relationship starts when she answers the phone. Be professional and      
           concerned but remember that the purpose of the call is not to do therapy 
                                                                                    
           over the telephone but to arrange a mutually convenient time when you can
           meet face-to-face. The client may be anxious; however, do not assume that
           you know what that anxiety is about. Also remember that asking for help is
                                                                                    
           not an easy thing to do.                                                 
               So, now you’ve arranged the first interview. What next? If you are   
                                                                                    
           fortunate enough to have your own office, take a look around and ask     
           yourself how you would feel coming there. If your client is likely to bring a
           child, is there anything for the child to play with so you can talk to the
                                                                                    
           parent? If the client is in a wheelchair, can she get through the door or do
           you need to meet in some other office? If the client has trouble speaking
           English, would it be reassuring to have someone there to translate, or would
                                                                                    
           it be insulting? And lastly, do you have pictures of your current partner or
           your children on your desk or other personal memorabilia around? If so, it’s
                                                                                    
           probably a good idea to ask your supervisor’s opinion about whether or not
           to put them away, since they have to do with who you are and not with who
           the client is, and you have no idea what meaning the client will attribute to
                                                                                    
           them or how she will see you once she has seen them.                     
               Now you have prepared yourself for your first interview. The next    
                                                                                    
           question is: How will you remember what the client tells you? There are  
           many schools of thought:                                                 
                                                                                    
               Never take notes, just listen carefully.                             
                                                                                    
               Always have pad and pencil handy to jot down a phrase or note that   
               will jog your memory.                                                
               Audiotape.                                                           
                                                                                    
               Don’t audiotape.                                                     
                                                                                    
               Your answer will probably rest someplace between what your agency    
                                                                                    
           feels is appropriate and your own sense of how anxious or distracted you’re
           going to feel. Even if your agency feels that note-taking, in general, is a bad
           idea-because it seems too impersonal or will divert your attention from the

=== Page 17 (1 cols) ===
client-the exception is almost certainly going to be the first interview. You
           need to get some basic data and you need to get it accurately. One option is
           to inform the client that recording information accurately is the purpose of
                                                                                    
           your note-taking and ask her if she feels comfortable with your doing that.
           Most clients will say “yes”; however, if one doesn’t you will simply be  
                                                                                    
           confronted with the need to cultivate an essential habit: that is, making
           some notes after every interview. The word some is emphasized because    
           you will not always have time to write down everything. If you make it a 
                                                                                    
           practice to note five or six key phrases or observations, you will probably
           be able to reconstruct much of what happened.                            
                                                                                    
               Now you are ready to greet the client. This moment is important.     
           Although it may vary slightly depending on how many people are involved  
           and the circumstances under which you are seeing the client, there are a few
                                                                                    
           basic principles intended to transmit courtesy, interest, and a clear message
           that this is a professional rather than a social relationship.           
               If at all possible, you should always go out and meet the client rather
                                                                                    
           than having her sent to your office by a receptionist. Opinions vary on  
           whether you should introduce yourself more or less formally, e.g., “I’m Ms.
                                                                                    
           Lukas” versus “I’m Susan Lukas” versus “I’m Susan.” They also vary on    
           the issue of whether or not to shake hands with clients. Depending on her
           clinical outlook and the circumstances under which a client is coming for
                                                                                    
           therapy, your supervisor may feel that any physical contact might transmit a
           misleading or potentially threatening notion about therapy. Therefore, all
                                                                                    
           these questions should be discussed before the first interview.          
               Having greeted the client, and while leading the way to your office, 
           you should remember that the interview has already started. Listen very  
                                                                                    
           carefully to what the client is saying and make a mental note of your overall
           first impression. When you have ushered her in, pay attention to how the 
           client reacts to your office. What does she say? Where and how does she  
                                                                                    
           choose to sit? (If possible, you should arrange seating so the client can sit
           facing you at a distance that permits her to speak in a normal voice, but is
                                                                                    
           far enough away so that she does not feel you could reach out and touch  
           her. If the client comes from a culture in which reaching out and touching
           another person’s arm is a sign of friendship or interest, then she can move
                                                                                    
           the chair closer to you if she chooses to.) Does she wait for you to suggest

=== Page 18 (1 cols) ===
that she sit down? Does she sit on the edge of the chair? Does she seem  
           disorganized?                                                            
               Try to help the client to feel more comfortable. Show her where she  
                                                                                    
           can hang her coat if she wants to. Suggest that she might feel more      
           comfortable in another seat. But remember: If the client chooses not to do
                                                                                    
           any of these things, do not urge her to. The goal is to “start where the client
           is,” rather than expecting her to do it your way. You are concerned with her
           feeling of what is comfortable, not yours.                               
                                                                                    
               Once the client is seated, if she starts talking, let her. And pay very
           close attention. Often, the first things the client tells you are the most
                                                                                    
           significant. If she doesn’t start talking, you might want to introduce yourself
           again, this time adding to the introduction the fact that you are an intern (or
           extern, or student, or whatever phrase your school or agency prefers). If you
                                                                                    
           know you will be staying in the agency for only a limited time, ask your 
           supervisor or your school what the policy is concerning when to inform   
           your client of that fact. Some feel it is best to let the client know at the
                                                                                    
           beginning that you are a student and will be leaving the agency on a given
           date. Others feel it is better to proceed as if you were just another member
                                                                                    
           of the staff and to wait until the client is engaged to tell her about your
           departure. You will have to find a position on this issue that is comfortable
           for you, but it is best to clarify it before you start interviewing clients.
                                                                                    
               Some clients may pursue this issue. They may want to know more       
           about your credentials, or they may tell you they were “expecting to see a
                                                                                    
           doctor.” You may need to explain something about how the agency works    
           and who comprises the staff. Or this may lead to a discussion of the client’s
           previous experience with therapy. It is generally best, however, not to get
                                                                                    
           into an extended discussion about who you are. For instance, some clients
           may express the feeling that you are too young (or too old) to understand
           their problem, while others may feel that you cannot know what it is like to
                                                                                    
           be a parent if you’ve never had a child. Usually, these concerns will fade
           over the next few interviews, as you demonstrate your interest and       
                                                                                    
           professionalism. In the meantime, unless you feel, or have been told, that
           there is a compelling reason to do so, the less you reveal about yourself the
           better. This can often be accomplished by explaining that the purpose of 
                                                                                    
           your meeting together is to help the client understand the difficulties she is

=== Page 19 (1 cols) ===
struggling with. If this seems withholding, remember that the focus of   
           concern should remain on the client’s needs and how best to meet them.   
               One way to impart this feeling is to help the client start talking about
                                                                                    
           what brought her here. This can be a straightforward question. Or, if you
           know something about the client’s situation from the intake information, 
                                                                                    
           you might want to guide her by saying something like, “I know your       
           husband died two months ago. Can you tell me more about that?”           
           Remember, the purpose of the interview, no matter how much you know, is  
                                                                                    
           to get the client to tell you her own story in her own words.            
               And while she is talking, the most important tasks you have are to   
                                                                                    
           listen and not put words (or feelings) into the client’s mouth. What that
           means is that the client may describe to you a situation that would make you
           feel angry, or frightened, or helpless. However, that’s not necessarily what
                                                                                    
           the client feels or can accept that she feels. Therefore, you need to respond
           with language that is as emotionally neutral as possible. Stay away from 
           loaded words like “furious” or “incompetent” or “I would have felt…”     
                                                                                    
           Also, avoid clinical jargon like “depressed” or “anxious” or “guilty.” Let
           the client tell you what she is experiencing by simply listening or saying
                                                                                    
           something like, “That sounds like it was very difficult for you,” or, “I can
           see this is very painful for you.” Let the client define what difficult means
           or what it is that is painful for her.                                   
                                                                                    
               This sounds as though you are supposed to remain mute while the      
           client tells her story. That is not the case. It is probably more useful to think
                                                                                    
           of yourself as arriving in a new country and trying to understand what the
           customs are. If the client comes from a different race or religion or social
           circumstance, there will be both cultural and personal values that are   
                                                                                    
           different. Your job is simply to be aware of that and not to judge her   
           experience by your own. In addition, you will be exploring the unique    
           terrain of this person’s life. You should feel free to ask questions about her
                                                                                    
           experience. For instance, “Mary is your sister-in-law?” or “Did you move a
           lot?” or “It sounds like things changed a lot after your mother died.” And
                                                                                    
           most importantly, it is okay to say, “I don’t understand.” Remember, the 
           client will appreciate your interest in her, and asking her to help clarify who
           or what or when or how is a way of demonstrating your interest.          
                                                                                    
               The question to avoid, however, is “Why?” For instance, “Why did     
           your father do that?” or “Why did you feel that way?” or “Why can’t you

=== Page 20 (1 cols) ===
tell your brother that?” These questions call for an understanding of    
           motivation and for a response that suggests insight about the client’s own
           behavior or the behavior of others. They are also implicitly asking the client
                                                                                    
           to articulate feelings. She may do that spontaneously, but it is best not to
           ask for feelings yet. There are a number of reasons for this.            
                                                                                    
               First, and most obvious, the client may not know the answer. She may 
           never even have thought about the question before. In that case, you run the
           risk of making her feel inadequate, which is certainly not the way you want
                                                                                    
           to make her feel. The second possibility is that she may know an answer but
           the answer she knows is a source of conflict for her, in which case she’s
                                                                                    
           going to avoid telling you but come away with the impression that therapy
           is going to force her to tell you things she is not yet prepared to talk about.
               The third possibility is that she may tell you far more than she meant
                                                                                    
           to tell you. It may feel at the time like you are having a wonderful interview
           in which the client is being “open” and “able to get in touch with a lot of
           her feelings.” The risk in such an event, however, is that you may never see
                                                                                    
           her again. She may leave feeling she has “spilled her guts,” frightened or
           humiliated that she has told her inner thoughts to a stranger. Remember, she
                                                                                    
           has a right-and you have an obligation-to protect her from a sense of    
           premature intrusion into her private feelings, particularly since you have not
           assessed what effect such revelations will have on her functioning.      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                  REMEMBER                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Ask who, what, when, where and how. Don’t ask why.                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               The sum total of all this, then, is that you want to ask only about facts
                                                                                    
           and information the client can provide without having to probe her feelings
           or motivations. After all, if she were clear about her feelings, she probably
                                                                                    
           wouldn’t be coming for help with a problem in the first place. Furthermore,
           asking “why” can lead you into making premature judgments about the

=== Page 21 (1 cols) ===
client’s problem, since you will be fighting the desire for explanations and
           conclusions.                                                             
               So, what information do you want to gather during this first interview?
                                                                                    
           Foremost is her description of why she is here now as opposed to six     
           months ago or six years ago (this is known in clinical parlance as the   
                                                                                    
           “presenting problem”). You want the basic data if you don’t have them:   
           name, age, marital status, occupation; with whom she lives and where; any
           previous experiences of therapy; and perhaps some preliminary information
                                                                                    
           about her family of origin. You also want to get some sense of her support
           system: Does she have friends? Do her relatives live nearby? Does she have
                                                                                    
           a good working relationship with colleagues at her job? Many of these    
           answers will emerge spontaneously. If they don’t, ask for them.          
               Toward the end of the session, you want to leave yourself enough time
                                                                                    
           to ask the client if she has any questions. In addition, you want to ask 
           whether she would like to come back again and talk further. You might help
           her make that decision by pointing out what you are seeing, e.g., that she
                                                                                    
           seems to be struggling with her feelings about her father’s death or that it is
           sometimes difficult to know the right thing to do when you are having    
                                                                                    
           trouble with your child.                                                 
               The goal here is to try and arrive at a mutual definition, in language
           that seems right to the client, of what the presenting problem is. Under the
                                                                                    
           best circumstances the client will say something like, “That’s exactly the
           way I would have said it.” If you do not reach a mutual definition, however,
                                                                                    
           that is not a reason to despair, since you are new at this. It is perfectly
           alright to suggest that the client return again so you can further explore and
           clarify what it is she would like your help with.                        
                                                                                    
               If the client does want to come back you need to arrange a time to   
           meet again; in addition, if your agency requires it, you need her to sign
           some kind of permission to provide services. You may also need to discuss
                                                                                    
           how fees are paid, insurance coverage, and other documents that may need 
           to be filled out.                                                        
                                                                                    
               The client may also raise the question of confidentiality: Who will  
           know about what is discussed between the two of you? This issue will be  
           discussed in a number of different contexts later in the book, but it is 
                                                                                    
           important for now to realize that there are some exceptions in practice to the
           notion that client confidentiality will be upheld at all costs. For instance,

=== Page 22 (1 cols) ===
information is usually shared in agencies where there is a team approach to
           treatment decisions. Also, in most settings where students train, there are
           seminars or other learning situations in which group discussions of cases
                                                                                    
           occur. More importantly, in instances involving certain risks of danger to
           the client or others, there are exceptions in the law to your right to keep
                                                                                    
           information confidential.                                                
               You should discuss these issues with your supervisor in advance. You 
           need to find out what exceptions prevail and get some basic guidelines so
                                                                                    
           that you will be prepared and comfortable in talking with your clients about
           how things work in your agency. Usually, after noting the exceptions, you
                                                                                    
           should be able to reassure the client that no information about her will leave
           the agency without her written consent.                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                             CONFIDENTIALITY                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            1. Find out if, and under what circumstances, you are required by       
                law not to maintain confidentiality.                                
            2. Except in those circumstances, always get written consent from       
                                                                                    
                your client to share information about her with other agencies.     
            3. When you get a telephone call about a client, always remember        
                                                                                    
                that even the fact that she is attending therapy is confidential    
                information that you can release only with the client’s             
                permission.                                                         
                                                                                    
            4. When you present cases outside your agency, always change            
                clients’ names and disguise their life circumstances                
                                                                                    
                sufficiently to protect confidentiality.                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Once you have established the parameters of confidentiality, you must
           get in the habit of observing them even when it seems unnecessary. You   
           must learn to disguise the names of clients when talking about them, unless
                                                                                    
           it is absolutely essential to use their real names. When you discuss cases
           with people outside your agency - and many would question if this is a   
                                                                                    
           sound practice at all-you should give as little information as possible and

=== Page 23 (1 cols) ===
disguise what you do give. When you talk to colleagues at school,        
           remember that the world really is a small one; when you talk to colleagues
           at work, it is best to do so in the privacy of your own office, not where other
                                                                                    
           clients might overhear the conversation.                                 
               So, you and your new client have agreed to meet again next week.     
                                                                                    
           Perhaps, depending on how your agency works, you have told her that you  
           will meet for 45 minutes once each week. Or perhaps you have agreed that 
           you will discuss with the treatment team what approach would be most     
                                                                                    
           useful and that you will report those findings to her at the next session. It is
           often helpful to give the client a card noting the date and time of your next
                                                                                    
           meeting. (You may not want to do this for all clients. It’s a judgment you’ll
           have to make at the time.) However, it is best to do this without asking the
           client if she needs it, since you may embarrass her. As you will discover,
                                                                                    
           clients cancel or miss appointments for many reasons, but not knowing the
           date or time should not be one of them.                                  
               You are now ready to end the session and usher your new client out.  
                                                                                    
           You rise and walk to the door; then, as your client is about to leave, she
           says, “Well, I guess next week I’ll have to tell you about the time my father
                                                                                    
           tried to kill himself.” This is known as the “door-knob syndrome”: that is,
           the client waits to tell you some piece of information that is terribly  
           important or frightening or embarrassing until there is no time to discuss it
                                                                                    
           further. The general rule is to say something like, “That sounds like    
           something we should discuss further. Let’s begin with that next week,” and
                                                                                    
           not to allow the session to be prolonged. This is a way of letting the client
           know that she has a limited amount of time in which to talk with you each
           week and that it will be more useful if she brings up disturbing issues when
                                                                                    
           you have time to explore them together. The notable exception to this    
           general principle, however, is if the client says something like, “Next week
           I guess I’ll have to tell you about the time I tried to kill myself.” This issue
                                                                                    
           will be covered more thoroughly in Chapter Nine; for now simply          
           remember that you never let a client leave your office if you have any sense
                                                                                    
           that she may do herself, or someone else, harm.                          
               In brief, that is the first interview with an adult client. In the next
           chapter we will look more carefully at the three areas on which you are  
                                                                                    
           going to be concentrating your attention while you are meeting with the  
           client: looking, listening, and feeling.

=== Page 24 (1 cols) ===
OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 25 (1 cols) ===
two                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                     L                                                              
                       OOKING                                                       
                                       , L                                          
                                            ISTENING                                
                                                               ,                    
                            AND                                                     
                                      F                                             
                                        EELING                                      
                                                       :                            
               T                                                                    
                  HE                                                                
                        M                                                           
                            ENTAL                                                   
                                          S                                         
                                            TATUS                                   
                                                          E                         
                                                            XAM                     
           N                                                                        
              ow that your first interview is over, you must leave yourself enough  
           time in your schedule to think about it and to make notes, first and     
           foremost, of what you have observed. Again, there is an operative phrase 
           here: “what you have observed.” We will talk further on in this chapter  
           about the importance of your own feelings while the client is in your office,
           but the place to begin organizing your thinking about a client is with the
           observable.                                                              
               This process of noting the observable in some systematic way is      
           referred to as the mental status exam (MSE). It is different from the    
           biopsychosocial assessment, although the two frequently appear together in
           the case record. The biopsychosocial assessment is based mostly on facts 
           about the client’s life and a description of the problem which the client has
           provided you during a series of interviews. The mental status exam is    
           essentially your observations. It is used in different ways in different 
           clinical settings, but those differences have more to do with the time at
           which one formulates one’s findings than they do with content.           
               For example, the results of a mental status examination might be used
           to hospitalize a patient after an initial interview, or they might not be
           formulated until the sixth session, when the biopsychosocial assessment is
                                                                                    
           being prepared; in either case, however, the contents of the mental status
           exam and the order in which you note your observations are always the    
           same. In fact, the mental status exam is probably the most widely used   
                                                                                    
           assessment tool among mental health professionals.

=== Page 26 (1 cols) ===
As you will quickly discover in reading this chapter, “widely used” is
           not the same as “easily used.” In fact, the mental status exam is filled with
           phrases and concepts that take awhile to learn. The first time you read them
                                                                                    
           they will almost certainly seem both abstract and overwhelming. Even if  
           you do succeed in getting a loose handle on them before your first       
                                                                                    
           interview, you will probably still need to go back and re-read them after that
           interview and several others before gaining any feeling that they are a  
           routine part of your assessment of a client.                             
                                                                                    
               The question then becomes: Why even think about the mental status    
           exam now rather than later-much less try and write one-especially since you
                                                                                    
           are unsure of yourself and the agency might not even require it for a while?
           The best answer is that the mental status exam is an extremely useful tool
           for assessing a client over time. That is, conceptualizing your initial mental
                                                                                    
           status exam as a snapshot taken at the first interview, to be followed   
           periodically by new snapshots, is going to help you understand what part of
           the client’s initial presentation has to do with the stress of the moment and
                                                                                    
           what part reflects his basic personality.                                
               In addition, using the mental status exam in this way offers an ongoing
                                                                                    
           opportunity to formalize answers for yourself to three vital questions: What
           has changed? When did it change? Has it changed for the better or for the
           worse? The answers to these questions will help you and your supervisor in
                                                                                    
           many ways, from evaluating the client’s suitability for your agency to   
           formulating diagnoses and future interventions.                          
                                                                                    
               Your agency may ask that you use a specific form for your mental     
           status exam and might even require that you use the mental status exam as a
           formal observation tool while the client is in your office for the initial
                                                                                    
           interview. If so, you should discuss with your supervisor how to introduce
           the idea to your client and which questions are considered vital.        
               As you will see from the sample questions at the end of this chapter, it
                                                                                    
           is also possible to do a mental status exam without asking specific questions
           of the client unless something in the interview indicates a need for further
                                                                                    
           information. It is always necessary that all areas of content be addressed
           (e.g., physical appearance, thought content), but there is some latitude 
           within each area.

=== Page 27 (1 cols) ===
ESSENTIAL         AREAS      TO  ADDRESS         IN THE                
                                                                                    
                          MENTAL      STATUS      EXAM                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            A                                                                       
             PPEARANCE                                                              
                       : How does he look and behave?                               
            S                                                                       
             PEECH                                                                  
                  : How does he speak?                                              
            E                                                                       
             MOTIONS                                                                
                    : What is his predominant mood? What is his                     
                predominant affect? (Mood = How does the client feel most of        
                the time? Affect = How does the client appear to be feeling         
                while he is with you?)                                              
            T                                                                       
             HOUGHT PROCESS AND CONTENT:                                            
                                        (Process = How does  the client             
                think? Content = What does he think about?)                         
            S                                                                       
             ENSORY PERCEPTIONS                                                     
                               : Are there any indications of illusions or          
                hallucinations?                                                     
            M                                                                       
             ENTAL CAPACITIES                                                       
                            : Is he oriented × 3? What is your estimate of his      
                intelligence? Can he remember and concentrate? How are              
                his judgment and insight?                                           
            A                                                                       
             TTITUDE TOWARD THE INTERVIEWER                                         
                                          : How does the client behave              
                toward you?                                                         
               Regardless of when you do the mental status exam or what form you    
           use, there are two things to keep in mind. First, if you don’t understand
           something the client has told you, ask for a further explanation. Remember,
           you are embarking on a mutual effort to understand something about the   
           client, so only rarely will the client be surprised or offended by the need for
           clarification. Second, your task on the mental status exam is to document
           what is noteworthy, and it is better-especially at the beginning-to find too
           much noteworthy rather than too little.                                  
               The next question is: Where to begin? The answer is always the same. 
           No matter when you choose to do the mental status exam, you always start 
           by describing those things about the person that anyone looking at him for
           the first time would notice, regardless of what conversation occurred. Ask
           yourself: What was my instantaneous visual sense of the client? Did he look
           healthy or sick? Did he have any obvious deformities? Was his clothing   
           appropriate? Was it clean? Did he walk in an awkward or stiff way? Did he

=== Page 28 (1 cols) ===
sit comfortably or did he seem tense? Did he have a tic? Did he look me in
           the eye?                                                                 
               There are many, many such questions. Your agency may use a standard  
                                                                                    
           checklist or a “fill in the blanks” form or expect you to present your mental
           status exam in a series of paragraphs. Whatever the format, you may wish 
                                                                                    
           to use the list of questions at the end of this chapter, not because an answer
           to every question needs to appear in your written observations about every
           client, but to remind yourself that, first of all, a good clinician is a good
                                                                                    
           observer. Behind that statement lies a premise that nothing is irrelevant in
           understanding a client, especially at the beginning. With each successive
                                                                                    
           meeting you will alter or enhance your understanding of the importance of
           some aspect of your first observations, but for now your radar should be 
           scanning all the time, picking up the most obvious and the most subtle   
                                                                                    
           visual cues.                                                             
               At the same time, however, you must continually guard against two    
           very real temptations that arise out of the discomfort that comes from not
                                                                                    
           knowing, as described in the introduction. The first is the wish to infer
           meaning from what you are actually seeing; the second is the converse of 
                                                                                    
           the first-that is, the temptation to “see” things that are really your own
           assumptions.                                                             
               So how might you prematurely infer meaning from what you are         
                                                                                    
           seeing? Well, let’s take a simple example: The client appears in a winter
           coat in June. That might strike you as inappropriate, even bizarre, and your
                                                                                    
           inclination might be to label that observable fact as pathological and short-
           circuit the process of exploration necessary to discover whether it might
           mean something different.                                                
                                                                                    
               For example, is the winter coat a sign of poverty? Might it signal some
           medical condition that needs attention? Is it covering bruises? These are
           only three possibilities; you can no doubt think of many more. The point,
                                                                                    
           however, is that, rather than inferring from a single piece of data, you must
           use what you are seeing to point you in the direction of further questions for
                                                                                    
           yourself and for the client.                                             
               The other pitfall in this process is to “see” things that are actually your
           own feelings or assumptions. For instance, the client reports to you that he
                                                                                    
           is a recovering drug addict who stole money from his friends and family to
           support his habit. As you hear his story you can also “see” that he is

=== Page 29 (1 cols) ===
humiliated by this revelation and feels he deserves to be punished. That 
           description might be based on a series of observable cues; i.e., the client did
           not make eye contact during the time he was talking about his addiction and
                                                                                    
           the client shifted in his seat and the client expressed difficulty in talking
           about his drug-related behavior because “It always makes me feel like I got
                                                                                    
           away with murder.” Given those observable points of reference, the       
           assumption that the client experiences humiliation and feelings that he  
           should be punished is demonstrable.                                      
                                                                                    
               However, what we are concerned about guarding against in such a      
           situation is a conclusion that the client is humiliated and deserves to be
                                                                                    
           punished because if you were in his shoes that’s the way you would feel or
           because, despite your good intentions as a clinician, you have some feeling
           that he ought to feel that way considering what he did to all those people
                                                                                    
           who trusted him. That is, you are “seeing” something that is actually    
           coming from you and not from the client.                                 
               So thus forewarned about what you are seeing and what you are not,   
                                                                                    
           you should note any visual cues that strike you as unusual. If the client
           offers no explanation of these signs himself, you will discuss what they 
                                                                                    
           might mean with your supervisor and use that discussion to focus your    
           attention in the next interview. Or, the two of you may combine them with
           material from other areas of the mental status exam to begin a broader   
                                                                                    
           formulation.                                                             
               While you are in the process of making a mental or written note to   
                                                                                    
           yourself of those significant visual characteristics, you should begin   
           focusing your attention on the client’s speech, which is the next major area
           of observable information to be included in the mental status exam. What is
                                                                                    
           meant in the MSE by speech is how the client says what he says, not what 
           he is saying. Does he say it rapidly or slowly? Does he not speak at all?
           Does he have an impediment to his speech that makes it difficult for him to
                                                                                    
           say what he wishes to say or for you to understand it? Does he speak     
           audibly or are you straining to hear? Is his voice inappropriately loud? Does
                                                                                    
           he talk baby-talk or speak in such a rapid, frantic way that you wonder if he
           could stop if he wanted to? All these are questions concerning speech, and
           anything that strikes you as unusual is noteworthy.                      
                                                                                    
               The next area of concentration will be the client’s emotions. However,
           before we begin to explore this dimension of the MSE it should be

=== Page 30 (1 cols) ===
mentioned that you may or may not focus your attention on these broad    
           areas in quite such a neat series as they are being described. If you are
           doing the mental status exam with a questionnaire, it will almost certainly
                                                                                    
           go in this order. But if you are conducting an interview from which you will
           do the MSE after the client leaves your office, you will probably discover
                                                                                    
           that you have skipped around during your interview. The important thing is
           to remember that all the areas of observation are necessary in order to  
           complete a rigorous mental status exam.                                  
                                                                                    
               What do we mean by emotions? Well, two things. The first is mood,    
           the second is affect, and this distinction seems to be a particularly sticky
                                                                                    
           one for many clinicians. Perhaps this will help: Mood refers to how the  
           client is feeling most of the time. When you ask, he may tell you. For   
           instance, he may say, “I feel panicky all the time,” or “I wake up angry, I go
                                                                                    
           to work angry, I come home angry.” In these cases, you would say in your 
           description of his mood, “The client’s predominant mood is one of panic (or
           anger),” and use the quote from the client to document that statement.   
                                                                                    
               But sometimes the client has difficulty describing his mood. At these
           times you need to make an inference based on a combination of observable 
                                                                                    
           manifestations and the client’s own comments. To minimize the possibility
           of misjudging the client’s mood, it is best to document both your        
           observations and his words. For example, “The client’s predominant mood  
                                                                                    
           is depressed. He sits in a slumped position. His hair appears uncombed. He
           states, ‘I used to come home and cook myself a real meal. Now if I can fix
                                                                                    
           myself a bowl of cereal it’s a big deal.’ ‘I can’t remember the last time I
           slept through the night.’ ‘The guys at work keep asking me where my head 
           is at these days.’”                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                  REMEMBER                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                When  writing up your mental status exam, whenever                  
                possible, document your observations with the client’s own          
                                                                                    
                words.

=== Page 31 (1 cols) ===
Two final comments about mood before we go on to affect. First, note 
           carefully that you are doing nothing more here than giving a name to the 
           most pervasive internal state the client is experiencing and documenting the
                                                                                    
           evidence for that state. You are not speculating on why the client feels that
           way; you are simply noting it. Second, there are many mood states other  
                                                                                    
           than anxiety or depression. People feel scared, or overwhelmed, or elated,
           or restless, or tense, or lots of other things. Try to find the most accurate
           description you can for what the client is experiencing.                 
                                                                                    
               Now to the question of affect. Affect refers to the way the client shows
           his emotions while he is with you, and it may or may not coincide with the
                                                                                    
           internal state the client describes himself as feeling over time. That idea
           should become clearer as we examine the various aspects of assessing the 
           client’s affect, so let’s start with the first question you ask yourself: What is
                                                                                    
           the predominant affective state of this client? You may not be able to   
           answer the question entirely until the interview is over; however, what you
           want to know is: How did this client look and sound most of the time he  
                                                                                    
           was with me, regardless of his underlying mood? For example, did he      
           sound confident, or worried, or angry, or sad most of the interview? If so,
                                                                                    
           that’s how you would describe his predominant affect. For instance, “The 
           client’s predominant affect was defiant. He repeatedly stated his belief that
           ‘I never needed my wife to begin with’ and ‘If he wants her he can have  
                                                                                    
           her’ in a defiant tone of voice.”                                        
               Next you would note the variability of his affect. To use the        
                                                                                    
           abovementioned example: Does he look and sound defiant even when he’s    
           talking about things other than his faltering relationship with his wife? If so,
           there’s not much variability in his affect, and that should be noted.    
                                                                                    
               You also want to attend to the intensity of a client’s affect. Does it
           seem excessive in any direction? Does he shout or sob uncontrollably     
           through most of the interview or, conversely, does he speak in a lifeless,
                                                                                    
           unemotional way? This latter phenomenon is noted as blunted or flat affect,
           depending on its severity.                                               
                                                                                    
               Next you want to notice how labile the affect is. Does the client’s  
           expression of his feelings shift rapidly from laughing to crying, from   
           intense rage to a sense of calm amusement? Do you experience a sense that
                                                                                    
           this person is on an emotional rollercoaster? If so, you would describe this

=== Page 32 (1 cols) ===
client’s affect as very labile, and you would give a description of what you
           observed during the interview that documented that lability.             
               Finally, you describe your observations about the appropriateness of 
                                                                                    
           the client’s affect to the content of the interview. Obvious examples of the
           inappropriateness of affect would be a person who giggles while he is    
                                                                                    
           telling you he was assaulted last week or cries as he describes the woman of
           his dreams. In either case you would note that the affect seemed         
           inappropriate to the content and cite an example wherever possible.      
                                                                                    
               No doubt, in reading these distinctions of variability or lability or
           intensity, you are concerned with what seem like too subtle differences  
                                                                                    
           between various aspects of assessing a client’s affect. In fact, however, with
           practice they begin to leap out at you. And, as with all other categories of
           the mental status examination, you will not necessarily comment on each  
                                                                                    
           aspect of affect in every write-up. The important thing is to note those 
           things that seem particularly distinctive or out of the ordinary.        
               Once you have done that it is time to turn your attention to the client’s
                                                                                    
           thoughts, focusing first on the process of the thoughts and then on the  
           content. In order to orient yourself to these different aspects of thought, it
                                                                                    
           will help to remember that process is how a person thinks and content is 
           what a person thinks about. A songwriter might say that process is the   
           music and content is the words.                                          
                                                                                    
               How would you recognize something notable in a client’s thought      
           process? Well, he may describe it to you. He may say that his thoughts go
                                                                                    
           too fast for him or “they seem all jumbled up” or that it seems like he can
           hardly think at all, suggesting that his thoughts might actually be moving
           more slowly than usual. If he describes some aspect of his thought       
                                                                                    
           processes, write it down.                                                
               But what if he doesn’t? Well, you’re going to get some sense of the  
           way he thinks by the way he talks, and your own reactions as the client is
                                                                                    
           talking may help alert you to something unusual. For instance, if you ask
           the client a question and you find yourself thinking “get to the point” while
                                                                                    
           he is responding, the client may be demonstrating circumstantiality. This is
           a disturbance in thought processes which is characterized by a lack of goal
           direction, although the person eventually gets to your question. Obviously,
                                                                                    
           you have to ask yourself whether you frequently feel people should get to
           the point more rapidly before you put such a description in the mental status

=== Page 33 (1 cols) ===
exam; however, if this reaction is unusual for you, then it is probably  
           objectively unusual.                                                     
               You may also hear certain words being uttered over and over again,   
                                                                                    
           regardless of what you have said. For example, the client may keep       
           repeating “yes, yes, quite, quite” while you are talking or as a response, no
                                                                                    
           matter what the content. This is called perseveration and can be a repeated
           phrase, such as was just described, or a return to the same subject no matter
           what efforts you make to divert him. In either case, you will have a sense
                                                                                    
           that the client has to keep repeating that expression, rather than choosing it
           because of the content you are discussing.                               
                                                                                    
               The next area of attention involving thought processes is that of    
           associations. There are a number of different aspects to the question of how
           a client makes associations in his thinking, but the basic question is: How
                                                                                    
           does the client get from one idea to the next? This may sound subtle, but
           you can frequently tell that you are in the presence of someone who is   
           having difficulty with associations if you find yourself thinking while he is
                                                                                    
           talking “What?” or “Did I miss something?” or “I don’t get it” or any    
           similar thought suggesting that you are having difficulty following his train
                                                                                    
           of thought.                                                              
               Obviously, you are going to first ask yourself whether you did miss  
           something. Was your mind wandering or were you momentarily distracted    
                                                                                    
           by some interruption? But if you repeatedly have this experience, you may
           be in the presence of one of a number of phenomena involving associations.
                                                                                    
           The most frequently encountered are tangentiality, loose associations, and
           flight of ideas.                                                         
               When someone’s thinking is tangential, you may very well have the    
                                                                                    
           sensation that he is sort of talking about the subject at hand, but not quite.
           For instance, if you ask him about his job, he may tell you about people 
           looking for jobs in today’s difficult economic times or some other response
                                                                                    
           that is about jobs but doesn’t answer the question. If that happens only 
           when you ask about his job, then you might need to understand more about 
                                                                                    
           the sensitivity this client feels about discussing his work situation. If it is
           tangentiality, it will recur with other topics as well.                  
               So will loose associations, a term which means simply that the client
                                                                                    
           moves from one topic to another without any apparent connection between  
           the two. You may recognize this when you find yourself struggling to “fill

=== Page 34 (1 cols) ===
in the blanks.” For example, consider the verse “roses are red, violets are
           blue, I like chop suey, do you smoke?” If you hear two unrelated ideas, like
           those last two lines, and you find yourself thinking, “Let’s see, he was in a
                                                                                    
           Chinese restaurant and someone near him was smoking…,” then you are      
           experiencing the disturbance of thought process known as loose           
                                                                                    
           associations.                                                            
               Finally, there is flight of ideas, which is aptly named because it often is
           accompanied by rapid speech, so that you literally feel like you are “flying”
                                                                                    
           with such a client. However, it can occasionally occur without rapid speech
           and might just feel like “free associating,” which most of us can do when
                                                                                    
           we’re asked. The difference for someone with flight of ideas is that he  
           cannot stop doing it.                                                    
               There are other disturbances of thought processes, but once you begin
                                                                                    
           to listen for how people string ideas together you will certainly notice any
           significant difficulty. If you’re not sure it falls in any of the categories
           described, simply note in your mental status exam that “the client appears to
                                                                                    
           experience a disruption in his thought processes.” You and your supervisor
           can then explore the specifics together.                                 
                                                                                    
               Once you have done that, you can turn your attention to the content of
           the client’s thoughts. This area of exploration is aimed at discovering the
           answers to a series of questions: What does the client think is going on 
                                                                                    
           around him? What role does he play in it? And what role do other people  
           play in relationship to him? If any of the answers demonstrate serious   
                                                                                    
           distortions in the client’s thoughts, you are likely to be hearing a delusion,
           which, simply stated, is an idea about one of these questions that the client
           absolutely believes to be true and you know absolutely to be untrue in   
                                                                                    
           reality. However, we are not talking here about who won the World Series 
           in 1958 or whether the federal government is really closing an historic  
           monument.                                                                
                                                                                    
               We are talking, for example, about a client who suggests that he has 
           unusual or magical or mystical or exaggerated powers. He may tell you    
                                                                                    
           directly that he is God, or Napoleon, or some other famous powerful      
           person, or he may simply allude to extraordinary capacities. In either case,
           you will want first to ask a few broad questions and then to ask directly
                                                                                    
           about these ideas to elicit some sense of the depth of the client’s beliefs. If

=== Page 35 (1 cols) ===
he is clearly convinced of these rare powers, you are in the presence of 
           someone who is suffering from delusions of grandeur.                     
               Or he may tell you that someone or some organization “is out to get  
                                                                                    
           me” or has already attempted to hurt him in some way or another. He may  
           tell you he is being followed by agents from the Internal Revenue Service
                                                                                    
           or by a woman who sold him bus tokens last week. Often, if you are having
           difficulty knowing whether the person might be describing a situation in 
           which he is really in danger, you can ask whether he has gone to the police.
                                                                                    
           Depending on the clarity and reasonableness of his answer, you will      
           probably have a clue as to whether he experiences delusions of persecution.
                                                                                    
               Somewhat akin to this are thought broadcasting, which is an          
           unshakable belief that other people can read his mind or hear what he is 
           thinking, and ideas of reference, in which the client believes that      
                                                                                    
           insignificant or unrelated events in the world have some secret meaning  
           aimed at him. For example, he will show you what appears to be a perfectly
           ordinary classified advertisement and tell you that it is in code from his
                                                                                    
           counterpart in a spy ring or that the Pope is trying to communicate with 
           him.                                                                     
                                                                                    
               Or the client might suffer from delusions of control, in which he    
           believes that something or someone other than himself may be controlling 
           what he does or says or thinks or that he can do this to others. Although it
                                                                                    
           may sometimes be hard to differentiate the latter from delusions of      
           grandeur, the idea that he is being controlled is often evident because the
                                                                                    
           client frequently believes it is a machine or mechanical device of some sort
           that is controlling him. For example, your client may tell you that his  
           answering machine tells him when to make phone calls or that the         
                                                                                    
           computers at his office are causing him to do things he should not be doing.
               Lastly, there are somatic delusions, which can sometimes be difficult
           to distinguish from severe anxiety about one’s health or physical well-  
                                                                                    
           being. In this case, you will simply have to patiently pursue a series of
           questions to find out whether or not the person’s fear that he has some  
                                                                                    
           deadly disease or unusual condition is based in reality. You will get some
           help in this regard when you receive pertinent medical records.          
               Delusions are not the only manifestations of a disturbance in thinking
                                                                                    
           which you may encounter. Sometimes it will seem to you as if a client    
           cannot let go of an idea. In fact, he may report to you that over and over

=== Page 36 (1 cols) ===
again he keeps on having a thought that he doesn’t understand the origin of
           or wishes would go away, but cannot stop himself from thinking no matter 
           what he does. This unremitting experience of an unwanted thought is      
                                                                                    
           known as an obsession. You may have heard this term used interchangeably 
           with a compulsion, but they are not the same. Probably the easiest way to
                                                                                    
           remember the distinction is that an obsession is always a thought and a  
           compulsion is always a deed.                                             
               For example, a person may describe to you a recurrent thought that his
                                                                                    
           mother is going to drown. That is an obsession. However, along with that 
           persistent thought he may describe suffering a repeated behavior which he
                                                                                    
           does not want to do, knows is unnecessary, and yet cannot stop. For      
           example, he may tell you it takes him an hour to take a shower because he
           has to count all the tiles in the shower three times before he can turn the
                                                                                    
           water on or off. He will probably he embarrassed and humiliated to tell you
           this, and may say that he thinks it is crazy, but he must do it. This is a
           compulsion.                                                              
                                                                                    
               Most compulsive rituals cluster around one of three types of actions:
           repetitive cleaning or washing, most often of one’s hands; or checking, such
                                                                                    
           as returning to one’s house many times to make sure the gas is off or the
           lights turned out; or counting, such as the incident described above with the
           bathroom tiles. They are not, technically, a disturbance of thought, but so
                                                                                    
           often accompany obsessions that one should always inquire about one if the
           other is present.                                                        
                                                                                    
               The client may also experience obsessive thoughts that arouse intense
           fears. These are known as phobias. They may be of specific situations, such
           as riding elevators or crossing bridges, or they may be more global, such as
                                                                                    
           a fear of leaving one’s house, known as agoraphobia, or a fear of heights,
           known as acrophobia, or a fear of strangers, known as xenophobia, or any 
           one of a number of others.                                               
                                                                                    
               Finally, there are disturbances of thought related to the idea of killing
           oneself or someone else. These are referred to in clinical parlance as   
                                                                                    
           suicidal or homicidal ideation. Needless to say, these areas of assessment
           are critical, and can cause extraordinary anxiety for the clinician, so they
           will be taken up separately in Chapters Eight and Nine.                  
                                                                                    
               Once you have noted any relevant observations about the process and  
           content of the client’s thoughts, you should turn your attention to any

=== Page 37 (1 cols) ===
unusual aspects of his sensory perceptions. These divide themselves into 
           two categories: illusions or hallucinations. Illusions refer to normal sensory
           events that are misperceived. For example, the wind blows a curtain in your
                                                                                    
           office and the client tells you that it is a vampire coming through the  
           window. If it is apparent that he is convinced of this fact, you are witnessing
                                                                                    
           an illusion.                                                             
               If, on the other hand, the client reports an experience involving one of
           the five senses, unrelated to any external stimuli and clearly not true, that is
                                                                                    
           an hallucination. For example, he may say that he hears his dead sister’s
           voice telling him to join her (an auditory hallucination), or sees the devil
                                                                                    
           beckoning to him (a visual hallucination), or smells flesh rotting (an   
           olfactory hallucination). Auditory and visual hallucinations are the most
           common. Olfactory, tactile (involving the belief that one is being touched
                                                                                    
           by something or someone), and gustatory (that something is being tasted) 
           hallucinations are very unusual.                                         
               One of the last areas of concern in any thorough mental status exam  
                                                                                    
           involves some assessment of fundamental mental capacities. The first     
           involves orientation. If you have ever read a mental status exam, you may
                                                                                    
           have come across a bewildering expression that “the client is oriented x 3.”
           The three orientations referred to are time, place, and person. Assuming 
           that the person you are interviewing speaks your language reasonably well,
                                                                                    
           you ought, without having to ask, to be certain by the end of your time  
           together that he knows approximately what time of day it is, what day of the
                                                                                    
           week it is, and what year it is. He ought to be able to tell you where he is
           and what his name is. You will almost certainly know this about the client,
           but if you have any doubts by all means ask, since a statement about     
                                                                                    
           orientation is essential.                                                
               Second would be an observation about the client’s level of intelligence.
           What you would indicate here is a simple assessment of whether or not you
                                                                                    
           feel that the client possesses at least average intelligence or above or 
           whether you feel that his intelligence might be below average.           
                                                                                    
               Next you would ask yourself about the client’s capacity for          
           concentration. Can he pay attention reasonably well to the subject you are
           discussing? Is he easily distracted? If this is an area of serious doubt on
                                                                                    
           your part, you can ask the client to count backwards from 20 or to subtract
           from 100 by threes. Assuming the client understands subtraction, you can

=== Page 38 (1 cols) ===
use either of these tests to inform yourself of his ability to concentrate,
           since interference with this capacity will be readily demonstrated by    
           confusion or simply forgetting his place.                                
                                                                                    
               Clearly linked to the capacity for concentration is memory functioning.
           Does the person remember what happened yesterday (recent memory) but     
                                                                                    
           not significant facts from when he was a ten-year-old boy, such as the name
           of the town he lived in or who was President (remote memory)? Is the     
           opposite true? Or does he have difficulty remembering the name of a      
                                                                                    
           significant person he talked about ten minutes ago (immediate memory)?   
           Any or all of these should be noted.                                     
                                                                                    
               The last areas of intellectual functioning you would comment upon are
           the client’s judgment and capacity for insight. A concern about the client’s
           judgment may arise at any point in the interview. For instance, he may tell
                                                                                    
           you that he frequently initiates fist fights in bars, or steals cars, or beats his
           children. Any dangerous or impulsive or violent behavior would be        
           described as poor or impaired judgment on the mental status exam and     
                                                                                    
           should include examples. If you sense some possible impairment of a      
           client’s judgment but it is never raised in the interview, ask a question such
                                                                                    
           as, “What would you do if you saw someone get hurt?” or “smelled smoke   
           in a movie theatre that was filled with people?”                         
               Insight refers to whether or not a person understands that he has a  
                                                                                    
           problem. How does he understand his problem and how does he describe it? 
           For instance, is it outside of him (e.g. “Everybody always blames me for 
                                                                                    
           things”)? Does he wish help for himself? If so, why now? And is what he  
           wishes help with a reasonably accurate perception of what might be the   
           problem he is having? Can he describe anything about his feeling states? 
                                                                                    
               Answers to any of these questions should lead you to an estimate of his
           capacity for insight, although it is important to remember that a limited
           capacity in an initial interview does not mean a person is necessarily a poor
                                                                                    
           candidate for therapy, since he simply may not understand that talking   
           about one’s feelings is okay here.                                       
                                                                                    
               Finally, having completed your comments about the client’s mental    
           capacities, you are going to devote the last part of your mental status exam
           to commenting on the client’s attitude toward you, the interviewer. Does he
                                                                                    
           seem suspicious or uncooperative? Afraid or arrogant? Reserved or        
           flamboyantly trying to entertain you? And, most importantly, does the client

=== Page 39 (1 cols) ===
seem to have an interest or ability to form an alliance with you to work on
           the shared task of understanding his problem? He may or he may not; in   
           either case, it requires an observation. And when you have completed that
                                                                                    
           task, you will have completed your first mental status exam.             
               However, by now at least two things are probably happening: first, a 
                                                                                    
           conviction that producing such a document would take months, and second, 
           a feeling that descriptions of some of the possible client behaviors or ideas
           sound crazy and would scare you out of your wits if you actually came    
                                                                                    
           face-to-face with them.                                                  
               Let’s start with the latter concern first, for it is certainly the place in
                                                                                    
           which your feelings count most in doing a mental status exam. If what you
           are hearing or seeing makes you feel endangered, or as if this client is out of
           touch with reality or might hurt himself or someone else, there are concise
                                                                                    
           appropriate steps that you can take to reassure both yourself and the client.
           These procedures will be addressed in Chapters Eight and Nine.           
               As to the question of whether or not you will ever really be able to do
                                                                                    
           a reasonably competent, reasonably speedy mental status exam, suffice it to
           say that it does take time and practice, that the first few you do will seem
                                                                                    
           very laborious, that you will not remember the names or differences      
           between things for a while-and that eventually you will get the hang of it.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           O                                                                        
            UTLINE FOR A MENTAL STATUS EXAM                                         
           Below are the general areas of observation on which you should focus     
                                                                                    
           while the client is with you, and document after the interview, to produce a
           complete mental status exam. Wherever possible and appropriate, you      
                                                                                    
           should use the client’s own words to augment your observations.          
               The mental status exam is also a useful tool for assessing children; 
           however, it must be adapted to their developmental level. You should     
                                                                                    
           discuss with your supervisor how to do that.                             
                                                                                    
           APPEARANCE                                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           1. Does the client look healthy?                                         
                                                                                    
           2. Does he look his age? If not, does he appear older or younger?        
           3. Does he have any obvious physical deformities? Describe.

=== Page 40 (1 cols) ===
4. Is he appropriately dressed?                                          
           5. Is his clothing clean?                                                
           6. Does he walk or move in an unusual way?                               
                                                                                    
           7. Does he sit in a comfortable posture?                                 
           8. Does he have any visible scars?                                       
                                                                                    
           9. Do his height and weight appear to be appropriate?                    
           10. Does he have any visible tics or unusual movements of the body, face,
               or eyes?                                                             
                                                                                    
           11. Does he make eye contact? If so, consistently or intermittently?     
           12. What is the client’s facial expression? Does it change over the course of
                                                                                    
               the interview?                                                       
                                                                                    
           SPEECH                                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           1. Does the client speak?                                                
           2. Does he speak unusually rapidly or slowly?                            
                                                                                    
           3. Does he have a speech impediment?                                     
           4. Does he speak unusually loudly or softly?                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           EMOTIONS                                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           1. What is the client’s predominant mood? Describe the comments and      
               behavior on which you base this observation.                         
           2. What is his predominant affect? Describe the comments and behavior on 
                                                                                    
               which you base this observation.                                     
           3. Does his affect vary over the course of the interview?                
           4. Does his affect seem excessive at any time? Describe.                 
                                                                                    
           5. Does he exhibit labile affect?                                        
           6. Is his affect appropriate to the content of the interview?            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           THOUGHT    PROCESSES   AND  CONTENT                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           1. Is the client’s thought process circumstantial?                       
           2. Is it perseverative?                                                  
           3. Is his thinking tangential?                                           
                                                                                    
           4. Does he demonstrate loose associations or flight of ideas?

=== Page 41 (1 cols) ===
5. Does he exhibit somatic delusions, or delusions of grandeur, persecution,
               or control? On what comments do you base this observation?           
           6. Does he appear to exhibit thought broadcasting or ideas of reference? On
                                                                                    
               what comments do you base this observation?                          
           7. Does he suffer obsessive thoughts or experience compulsive behavior? If
                                                                                    
               so, describe.                                                        
           8. Is he phobic? If so, what is the nature of the phobia?                
           9. Are there indications of homicidal or suicidal ideation? If so, on what
                                                                                    
               comments do you base this observation?                               
           10. Is there a particular subject that seems to preoccupy the client’s   
                                                                                    
               thoughts? If so, describe.                                           
                                                                                    
           SENSORY   PERCEPTION                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           1. Does the client appear to have any hearing problems?                  
           2. Does the client appear to have any sight problems?                    
                                                                                    
           3. Does the client suffer from illusions or hallucinations? If so, are the latter
               auditory, visual, olfactory, tactile, or gustatory? On what comments or
                                                                                    
               behavior do you base this observation?                               
                                                                                    
           MENTAL   CAPACITIES                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           1. Is the client oriented to time, place, and person?                    
           2. Does the client appear to be of average intelligence or above?        
                                                                                    
           3. Does he exhibit a capacity for concentration within the normal range? 
           4. Does he exhibit appropriate recent, remote, and immediate memory? If  
               not, on what do you base this observation?                           
                                                                                    
           5. Does his judgment appear impaired in any way? If so, on what comments 
               or behavior do you base this observation?                            
                                                                                    
           6. Does he have an appropriate sense of self-worth? If not, on what      
               comments or behavior do you base this observation?                   
           7. Does he appear to understand the consequences of his behavior?        
                                                                                    
           8. Does he exhibit a capacity for insight?                               
                                                                                    
           ATTITUDE   TOWARD    THE INTERVIEWER

=== Page 42 (1 cols) ===
1. What is the client’s attitude toward you?                             
           2. Does it change over the course of the interview?                      
           3. Does he respond to empathy?                                           
                                                                                    
           4. Does he appear to be capable of empathy?                              
                                                                                    
           T                                                                        
            HE MENTAL                                                               
                      S                                                             
                       TATUS                                                        
                            E                                                       
                              XAM                                                   
                                  : A S                                             
                                      AMPLE                                         
           Below is an example of a mental status exam written following the first  
           interview with Angel G. at the SouthWest Mental Health Clinic. Mr. G.    
           came with concerns about caring for his family after being laid off recently
           from his job.                                                            
             Angel G. is a thin, neatly dressed Hispanic male who appeared          
             younger than his stated age of 39. He sat stiffly throughout the       
             interview and made only intermittent eye-contact. His right hand       
             continually tapped the chair. Mr. G.’s speech was rapid and loud. His  
             predominant mood was anxious. He stated, “I don’t sleep. All night     
             I’m thinking and thinking. What if I don’t find anything?” Mr. G.’s    
             predominant affect was fearfulness but did vary with the content of the
                                                                                    
             interview and was not notably labile or inappropriate. He described his
             thoughts as “racing all the time lately,” but evidenced no thought     
             disorder. His thoughts are preoccupied with fears he may lose his wife 
                                                                                    
             and children. Mr. G. denies any suicidal or homicidal ideation and     
             shows no evidence of illusions or hallucinations. He is oriented x 3 and
                                                                                    
             is of average intelligence or above. He states, “I forget all the time.
             Like I’m going crazy or something. I never forgot anything before.”    
             Mr. G.’s judgment appears somewhat impaired regarding his fears that   
                                                                                    
             his family might leave him. “Last week I could not let my children go  
             to school. I thought if they went I would never see them again.” He has
                                                                                    
             a capacity for insight and stated, “My father lost his job and my      
             mother took us away. I think this has something to do with that.” Mr.  
             G. related to the interviewer in an alternately guarded and self-      
                                                                                    
             deprecating way, stating several times, “I don’t like talking about this.
             Probably you can’t do much for somebody like me.”                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 43 (1 cols) ===
three                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                    H                                                               
                       OW      TO                                                   
                                     T                                              
                                        HINK                                        
                                                   A                                
                                                      BOUT                          
                  Y                                                                 
                     OUR                                                            
                              C                                                     
                                 LIENT’S                                            
                                                 H                                  
                                                    EALTH                           
                                                                 :                  
                   T                                                                
                      HE                                                            
                            M                                                       
                                EDICAL                                              
                                                H                                   
                                                   ISTORY                           
           H                                                                        
              aving now threaded your way through your first mental status exam,    
           you are enhancing your skills of observation, listening with a greater sense
           of what you should be listening for, and honing your descriptive language
           to more accurately communicate to others what you have seen and heard. In
           short, you are focusing intently on all the expressions of your client’s 
           emotions. Right? Well, not quite.                                        
               So what’s missing, you ask? And what on earth would thinking about a 
           client’s medical history have to do with it? Why would it be your job    
           anyway? After all, you’re interested in becoming an accomplished clinician
           who devotes time and effort to helping clients understand their feelings.
               The short answer is that thinking and asking about the client’s physical
           health might turn out to be one of the most important things you ever do 
           with that client. The long answer is this chapter, the purpose of which is to
           help you appreciate the profound interrelationship between psyche (mind) 
           and soma (body) and to elaborate on the basic premise that a good,       
           responsible clinician thinks, asks, and demonstrates concern about her   
           client’s physical well-being.                                            
               As with all other aspects of assessment, when and what you should ask
           about the client’s health will vary depending on the setting in which you
           work and the circumstances under which the client comes for treatment. If
           you work in a hospital, you may very well have a full medical workup     
           available to you before you ever meet the client, as well as an opportunity
           to consult with her medical doctor. If you are in an outpatient setting such
           as a community mental health clinic, there may be a form routinely signed

=== Page 44 (1 cols) ===
by each new client that gives permission to contact her medical doctor   
           and/or a brief medical history that the patient herself fills out prior to being
           seen for the first time.                                                 
                                                                                    
               If the client has filled out such a form, read it carefully. Has she 
           answered all the questions? If not, is the lapse related to language or  
                                                                                    
           unfamiliarity with the terms, or should you wonder if she has chosen not to
           answer particular questions? Perhaps she skipped the section related to drug
           or alcohol consumption because she does not yet feel comfortable telling 
                                                                                    
           you about her worry that she may be a substance abuser. Or maybe she     
           indicated that her brother died at age 26 but did not indicate the cause of
                                                                                    
           death. If so, you might eventually find out that he committed suicide and
           she is too frightened or embarrassed to offer that information. Or the   
           absence of data may be related to that particular client’s cultural attitudes or
                                                                                    
           personal feelings about “doctors” (regardless of your actual professional
           training, you may often be perceived and addressed as “doctor”).         
               If the client has not filled out such a form, you need to discuss with
                                                                                    
           your supervisor whether your agency has any procedure or policy regarding
           the necessity of acquiring such information. If there is a policy, when  
                                                                                    
           should you act on it? Some believe it is essential to ask at least some broad
           questions about health issues in the initial interview, so that that information
           can be brought to the treatment team; others feel that the client could be put
                                                                                    
           off by that and recommend that you simply let the information emerge over
           time. In either case, whatever does emerge in your interviews should be  
                                                                                    
           noted in detail and shared with the treatment team.                      
               In clinical work, as has been stated before, there is a great temptation
           to prematurely ascribe psychodynamic or cognitive or contextual meaning  
                                                                                    
           to a client’s behaviors and interactions. Even though those ascriptions may
           eventually turn out to be very insightful, this is a dangerous business. The
           reason one is so tempted is probably obvious to you. After all,          
                                                                                    
           understanding the meaning of behavior is part of what makes this work so 
           interesting and gratifying. The reason it is dangerous might not be so   
                                                                                    
           obvious: Where your client works or how she makes love, what kind of     
           food she likes or how she gets along with her siblings, how she sleeps at
           night and whether she remembers her umbrella when she leaves your office 
                                                                                    
           might just as conceivably turn out to be symptoms of a physical illness as
           they are of an emotional conflict or a need to rethink behavior.

=== Page 45 (1 cols) ===
Thousands of years of folk medicine and hundreds of years of modern  
           science have amply documented the truth that there is hardly a system of 
           the body - be it respiratory, or cardiovascular, or endocrine, or any other-
                                                                                    
           that cannot be altered, however briefly or benignly, by feelings. But it is
           equally well documented that it is the rare “behavioral problem” or “mood
                                                                                    
           swing” or symptom of “anxiety” or “depression” that is not also a potential
           symptom of disease in the organism. For example, consider “the mad       
           hatter” in Alice in Wonderland. We think of him as some daffy eccentric  
                                                                                    
           who came from Lewis Carroll’s fertile imagination. In fact, in the       
           nineteenth century hatters used a form of mercury to cure the felt from  
                                                                                    
           which they made their creations, and breathing mercury fumes day in and  
           day out produced real changes in the brain chemistry that were often     
           accompanied by noticeably peculiar behavior. In Lewis Carroll’s time, such
                                                                                    
           people were described as “mad.” Today we might say there were “profound  
           neurological sequelae produced by toxins in the work environment.” The   
           point remains the same: The appearance of a mental disorder may be a     
                                                                                    
           symptom, not the cause of your client’s suffering.                       
               How your client makes love-or her lack of desire to do so-may have   
                                                                                    
           more to do with a pill she is taking for her diabetes than it does with her
           belief that her husband is unfaithful to her. A loss of appetite “even for my
           favorite foods” may signal a depressive reaction to a real event, just as the
                                                                                    
           client says it does. But it might also be linked to an underlying medical
           condition-for example, the presence of the HIV virus-which is both making
                                                                                    
           the client experience feelings of hopelessness and causing her body to be
           unable to metabolize food normally. A client’s report that “I hit my sister
           for no reason” may indicate a lifelong pattern of poor impulse control and
                                                                                    
           sibling rivalry or it may be a symptom of a brain tumor.                 
               By now you have probably gotten the idea. No doubt, you could        
           formulate your own ideas as to how a change in sleep habits or memory    
                                                                                    
           functioning-even forgetting an umbrella in your office-might be significant.
           And by now you can also see that it would be a dangerous conceit to      
                                                                                    
           presume that all problems can be cured by talking about feelings or      
           changing behavior. So let’s proceed to some of the basic questions you need
           to think about related to your client’s physical health and medical history.
                                                                                    
               First, does the client bring up any concerns about her health on her 
           own? If so, how does she see their relationship to her presenting problem?

=== Page 46 (1 cols) ===
For example, does the client tell you she is here because she recently   
           discovered that she has high blood pressure and that since that discovery
           she is constantly fearful that she is going to die? If so, she is experiencing
                                                                                    
           the medical problem as the stressor that is causing the feeling. Or she may
           report that she has always had trouble working for other people but that 
                                                                                    
           lately when she has an encounter with her boss she feels dizziness and   
           nausea for hours afterwards. In that case, she is concerned that it is her
           feelings that are precipitating a health problem.                        
                                                                                    
               In either case, she has provided you with an opportunity to further  
           discuss her health, because she herself has raised the possibility that there is
                                                                                    
           a relationship between the physical symptoms and the feeling states she is
           experiencing. However, she has also provided you with an “opportunity” to
           confirm or deny her interpretation of what her physical symptoms mean.   
                                                                                    
           This is not your job, especially with physical symptoms. It is your job to get
           some factual information. It is her physician’s job-perhaps in consultation
           with you, perhaps not-to diagnose medical conditions and to rule out     
                                                                                    
           physical illness.                                                        
               So why bother getting this information if discovering its meaning is 
                                                                                    
           not your job? For one thing, aspects of a client’s health history may indicate
           whether or not she is suitable for your clinical setting. For example, does a
           client have a serious enough medical condition that she might be better  
                                                                                    
           served at a clinic associated with a medical center, where more consistent
           monitoring of her health is possible? This is probably not a question you
                                                                                    
           can or should answer on your own, so you will need to gather data to share
           with your supervisor. The two of you will then decide whether the situation
           needs to be discussed with someone more familiar with medical issues,    
                                                                                    
           such as your staff psychiatrist. (Remember, psychiatrists are trained as 
           physicians before they are trained as psychiatrists.)                    
               The basic concept of evaluating health factors in assessing suitability
                                                                                    
           for treatment is also important because of the nature of the therapeutic 
           process itself. That is, even though the eventual outcome of treatment may
                                                                                    
           be the relief of stress, the process of therapy itself creates its own stress-
           which can sometimes be quite intense. Your information-gathering helps   
           you and those with whom you consult to assess whether the organism itself
                                                                                    
           is durable enough at this time to embark on the particular kind of treatment
           that your agency offers.

=== Page 47 (1 cols) ===
So let’s go back to thinking about the basic information you need to 
           ascertain the client’s current state of health. If the client has raised a health
           problem or symptom on her own, try to answer three fundamental           
                                                                                    
           questions: How long has the client been experiencing this problem or     
           symptom? How often does she experience this problem or symptom? And      
                                                                                    
           lastly, when she experiences the problem or symptom, how much does it    
           interfere with her daily life?                                           
               But what if the client doesn’t tell you she’s having a physical problem?
                                                                                    
           In fact, she may not mention her health at all. That may be a clue to you that
           this client is unfamiliar with the notion that body and mind are intimately
                                                                                    
           intertwined. Eventually you may want to explain that concept and explore it
           with her. Or it may turn out to be an illustration of another fundamental
           premise in clinical interviewing: that what the client does not talk about
                                                                                    
           may be just as important, or more so, in your understanding of that person
           as what she does share with you. We have already touched upon some       
           possible subjects, such as drug addiction or a family suicide, which-    
                                                                                    
           regardless of whether you agree with society’s attitude toward them-might
           be hard for people to discuss.                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                     IF A  CLIENT      HAS    A  PHYSICAL                           
                                                                                    
                                   SYMPTOM                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                How  long has she had it?                                           
                How  often does it occur?                                           
                                                                                    
                How  much does it interfere with her daily life?                    
                Has she seen a doctor?                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               People’s health issues also carry very personal meaning. Clients may 
                                                                                    
           experience all health professionals-including mental health professionals-as
           healers or helpers; but they might just as possibly have their own reasons to
           believe we’re intrusive or unfeeling. They may believe that the illness their
                                                                                    
           great-grandmother died of is what’s really causing these headaches; that

=== Page 48 (1 cols) ===
you couldn’t possibly help them overcome this incurable disease; that God
           will punish them if they talk about their pain with a stranger.          
               You cannot know these feelings when the client walks through your    
                                                                                    
           door. Nevertheless, you should not avoid talking about the client’s health,
           even if she does not bring it up. However, you must be sensitive to the  
                                                                                    
           possibility that raising the issue may arouse discomfort or fear in your 
           client.                                                                  
               Once the subject has been raised and you have established how        
                                                                                    
           troublesome or longstanding any of the client’s problems or symptoms are,
           you will want to know if she has been to a doctor for this condition. Implicit
                                                                                    
           in that question, and in her response, is another question: How do you know
           you have this condition? Did a doctor diagnose the symptoms or did a     
           friend tell her, “Well, it must be thus-and-so because I had the same    
                                                                                    
           symptoms about five years ago,” or did the client diagnose herself? Her  
           answer may tell you a great deal not only about this client’s feelings about
           “doctors” but also about how she views her symptoms and how she feels    
                                                                                    
           about taking care of herself and letting others take care of her. In addition,
           you may get an indication of potential difficulties in engaging this client in
                                                                                    
           therapy.                                                                 
               If you ask the client if she has been to a doctor she may just come right
           out and tell you she hates doctors or her family never goes to doctors or
                                                                                    
           she’s afraid of doctors or she can’t afford itor any of a hundred other  
           responses. These may or may not only be feelings about the medical       
                                                                                    
           profession; they may also be veiled ways of expressing a worry that she  
           may need to be hospitalized or have some painful procedure; they may even
           be an indirect communication about how she feels about seeing you at this
                                                                                    
           moment or what she imagines therapy will be like (e.g., anxietyproducing 
           or too expensive or too intrusive or against the grain of what her family has
           told her about the “right way” to handle one’s problems).                
                                                                                    
               Clearly, it is not your job to try and talk any client out of her feelings,
           either about a medical checkup or about therapy, but it may be necessary-if
                                                                                    
           your agency does require it-to explain to the client that getting a medical
           checkup is a routine part of the intake procedure here, and then to discuss
           with her when and how she might go about doing that. Again, how firmly   
                                                                                    
           you adhere to that expectation should be discussed with your supervisor.

=== Page 49 (1 cols) ===
Once you have established who diagnosed the condition, you will want 
           to explore whether or not the client is taking any medications for it. These
           may be medications prescribed by her doctor or they may be over-the-     
                                                                                    
           counter remedies such as cough medicines or pills to inhibit water retention,
           etc. Whatever they are, you want to know how often and how much she      
                                                                                    
           takes. Is that a dosage the doctor recommended? How long has she been    
           taking them and is she aware of any side-effects they may be causing? If 
           you’ve never heard of the medication, ask her to spell it for you. If she can’t
                                                                                    
           spell it and you’ve never heard of it, perhaps she has the bottle with her and
           you can copy the name. Then find out what that particular medication is  
                                                                                    
           supposed to do and whether or not she thinks it is helping.              
               The issue of medication is an extremely complicated one. There are   
           literally hundreds of medications prescribed for common medical          
                                                                                    
           conditions (e.g., allergies, asthma, high blood pressure) which have known
           side-effects related to changes in mood. No one would expect you to be   
           familiar with the side-effects of every drug on the market for every     
                                                                                    
           condition, but the knowledge that your client is taking a particular     
           medication will make it possible for you to explore with her physician or
                                                                                    
           your staff psychiatrist its potential relationship to the changes in mood or
           behavior the client is experiencing. However, even if the medication is not
           known to affect mood, it could still be having that effect on your client,
                                                                                    
           since every person taking a medication has her own unique reaction to it.
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                IF  A  CLIENT     IS  TAKING      MEDICATION                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Was  it prescribed?                                                 
                                                                                    
                If so, by whom?                                                     
                Why  was it prescribed?                                             
                What is it called?                                                  
                                                                                    
                How  much is she taking?                                            
                How  often is she taking it?                                        
                Is it helping?

=== Page 50 (1 cols) ===
It is especially important, therefore, to think about basic issues, such as
           age, size, and present life circumstances, when you are discussing a client’s
           current medications with the treatment team. The same dosage of          
                                                                                    
           medication can have very different effects on an 89-year-old and a 45-year-
           old. If a child is taking a particular medication this may be an indicator of a
                                                                                    
           much more serious condition than if an adult were taking the same drug. A
           client may tell you she is taking her pills three times a day, but if she lives
           alone and is feeling depressed she may inadvertently be taking five pills one
                                                                                    
           day and none the next.                                                   
               Another reason to inquire about medications the client is taking is that
                                                                                    
           the medication itself may be masking some other condition, either medical
           or psychological. This could be something as routine as the client taking
           over-the-counter medications for a stuffy nose: If the stuffy nose has   
                                                                                    
           returned every time she stops the medication and that pattern has been   
           going on for six months, then some further exploration might be indicated
           to see if the symptom is being caused by some underlying medical         
                                                                                    
           condition which, although it might not be serious, should be addressed so
           that the client can have some relief.                                    
                                                                                    
               Or more serious implications might be suggested. For instance, the   
           client might be taking over-the-counter medication to help her sleep and 
           may have done so for years without ever telling her doctor. That could be
                                                                                    
           contributing to a physical problem she is having; or it might be the only
           way she can manage overwhelming nighttime anxiety; or it might be a      
                                                                                    
           subtle disguise for a suicidal wish to “sleep forever” rather than tolerate
           another night of thinking about her problems.                            
               So the client may intentionally or unintentionally be using a        
                                                                                    
           medication that is affecting her mood. There are also medications that are
           given deliberately to alter mood or behavior; these are known as         
           psychotropic medications. These can cause physical symptoms as diverse as
                                                                                    
           seizures, headaches, tremors, etc. In some instances, prolonged use may  
           even produce irreversible side effects. For this and many other reasons, the
                                                                                    
           use of psychotropic medications has often been a source of controversy   
           among clinicians. Some argue that medication inhibits the progress of    
           treatment; others view these drugs as a revolutionary advance in the relief
                                                                                    
           of mental suffering; still others find them a necessary and suitable adjunct
           to therapy for certain conditions.

=== Page 51 (1 cols) ===
Whatever position you or your agency might be inclined to take       
           regarding psychotropic medications, as a responsible clinician you do have
           an obligation to at least familiarize yourself with the names and basic  
                                                                                    
           characteristics of the major categories (tranquilizers, antidepressants, 
           antipsychotics, etc.). Again, this information will be helpful in determining
                                                                                    
           the client’s suitability for your clinic, since it may give you a measure of the
           severity and duration of a mental condition that would indicate a need for a
           more or less structured treatment setting than the one in which you work.
                                                                                    
           Or it may suggest the need for a different sort of intervention altogether,
           such as a job training program or a group living situation.              
                                                                                    
               Another reason to pursue information about the kind of psychotropic  
           medication the client is taking is because someone is prescribing it for her.
           That doctor may be a psychiatrist who is monitoring the client’s use of that
                                                                                    
           antianxiety medication on a monthly basis. But it could also be a doctor in a
           local emergency room who gave the client a short supply of medication    
           with the understanding that whatever agency she went to next would take  
                                                                                    
           over responsibility for continuing the medication. Or it might be the family
           doctor, who actually prescribed that antidepressant for the client’s sister,
                                                                                    
           who never took it. Whatever the circumstances under which the client got 
           the medication, you need to ascertain whether or not her expectation, or her
           doctor’s expectation, is that your clinic will now assume responsibility for
                                                                                    
           evaluating the ongoing need for medication and for providing it. This may
           or may not be a service your agency is willing or able to provide, so you
                                                                                    
           will need to discuss this question with the treatment team.              
               Once you have clarified whether or not your client is using any      
           medications-either psychotropics or medicine for a current medical       
                                                                                    
           condition-you will want to get at least a thumbnail sketch of her medical
           history. Is this a person who has been basically healthy up until recently, or
           does she have a history of chronic or debilitating conditions dating back to
                                                                                    
           childhood? Did a serious illness or physical problem occur at a particularly
           crucial time in her development? For example, you may find out that she  
                                                                                    
           had a burn on her face when she was six that now looks fine, after several
           operations and plastic surgery, but was disfiguring then, or that during 
           adolescence she had a broken back that required six months of being away 
                                                                                    
           from school and friends. Remember, it is not your purpose at this stage to
           explore the meaning of these events with the client. You are simply

=== Page 52 (1 cols) ===
gathering data and listening for any indications of their meaning to her. As
           with all the other information you are gathering about the client, after she
           has left you will want to think about her history and what it might represent
                                                                                    
           to her.                                                                  
               Lastly, it is a good idea to briefly explore her family’s medical history.
                                                                                    
           Who died when and of what? Was it a lingering illness and who took care  
           of the sick person? How old was the client when that person died and what
           was his or her significance in the client’s life? There are many such    
                                                                                    
           questions, and by now you will no doubt be thinking about what various   
           answers might mean to your client.                                       
                                                                                    
               For example, the death of a mother while she was giving birth to a   
           younger sibling when your client was two will have very different        
           implications from the death of a mother who killed herself when your client
                                                                                    
           was 12. A 49-year-old client who recently lost a 54-year-old sister to   
           ovarian cancer will feel very differently about it if hers is the third  
           generation of women in her family who succumbed to ovarian cancer in     
                                                                                    
           their fifties than if no one in the family ever had that illness before. 
               The examples are legion, as are the feelings and meanings about health
                                                                                    
           and illness that each client brings to therapy. Every subculture has its own
           beliefs and traditions; every family’s attitudes and behaviors are different;
           every client has cultural and family beliefs and feelings superimposed over
                                                                                    
           her own individual sensibilities. And they may all be very different from
           yours.                                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                             SYMPTOMS         OF   HIV                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            Many of these symptoms can also be associated with illnesses            
            other than HIV. Nevertheless, you should be familiar with and alert     
                                                                                    
            to the following:                                                       
                                                                                    
                General symptoms  of HIV which may appear in men, women             
                and children include dramatic weight loss, chronic swollen          
                                                                                    
                glands, skin rashes, persistent diarrhea, chronic herpes,           
                bronchial pneumonia, recurrent minor infections, flu-like

=== Page 53 (1 cols) ===
symptoms, tuberculosis, persistent coughing, shingles,              
                thrush, and constant fatigue.                                       
                In women, HIV may  also manifest itself in symptoms such as         
                                                                                    
                anemia, urinary tract infections, vaginal warts or ulcers,          
                chronic vaginal yeast infections, cervical cancer or irregular      
                pap smears, or any chronic gynecological problem.                   
                                                                                    
                Symptoms  often appear first during pregnancy.                      
                In children, the presence of HIV may also be indicated by           
                recurring fevers, breathing difficulties, “failure-to-thrive”       
                                                                                    
                syndrome, developmental delays, brain damage, or chronic            
                ear, nose and throat problems.                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               You must strike a balance between the role of responsible clinician  
                                                                                    
           who requires certain information in order to assess what will really be most
           helpful and that of respectful interviewer who will patiently seek to    
           understand the client’s attitudes and meanings better before asking      
                                                                                    
           questions that may feel too intrusive or irrelevant to her. Once you have the
           data, you will do what you always do with new information: Write it down,
                                                                                    
           and after the client leaves, think about it.                             
                                                                                    
           T                                                                        
            HE                                                                      
               M                                                                    
                 EDICAL                                                             
                       H                                                            
                         ISTORY                                                     
           Below is a series of questions to which you eventually should know the   
           answers about a client. They are not necessarily questions you will ask the
           client directly; rather, they indicate information for which you should be
           listening. If it is necessary to ask the client these questions, the order and
           time at which they will be introduced should be discussed with your      
           supervisor.                                                              
           1. How is the client’s health? Is this a change?                         
           2. When was the last time she saw a doctor? For what reason?             
           3. Does she have regular checkups?                                       
           4. Does she smoke?                                                       
                                                                                    
           5. Does she drink? What does she drink? How much? How often?             
           6. Has she ever used any illegal drugs? Which ones? How often? For how   
                                                                                    
               long? Did she ever use any drugs intravenously?

=== Page 54 (1 cols) ===
If the client reports a current health problem:                          
           7. When did this problem/condition start?                                
           8. How often does it happen?                                             
                                                                                    
           9. When it happens, how much does it interfere with her everyday life?   
           10. Has she seen a doctor for this problem?                              
                                                                                    
           11. Has she ever been hospitalized for this problem or some other problem?
           12. If so, when, and for how long?                                       
           13. Does the client take any medication that is prescribed? What for? For
                                                                                    
               how long? What is the dosage? Has she noticed any side-effects?      
           14. Does she take any over-the-counter medications on a regular basis? For
                                                                                    
               what purpose? How often? How much? Has she noticed any               
               sideeffects?                                                         
           15. Has the client ever had any significant difficulties with a lack of sexual
                                                                                    
               desire? Lack of arousal or erection? Lack of sexual satisfaction?    
           16. Has the client ever been pregnant? Were there any complications?     
           17. Has the client ever been tested for AIDS? Has the client ever thought
                                                                                    
               she should be tested for AIDS? If so, why?                           
           18. Does the client have any historical factors that put her at risk for AIDS,
                                                                                    
               such as intravenous drug use that included sharing of needles,       
               prostitution, blood transfusions prior to the discovery of the AIDS  
               virus, unprotected sexual activity with a homosexual, bisexual, or   
                                                                                    
               heterosexual partner?                                                
           19. Does the client have, or has she had, any physical symptoms that     
                                                                                    
               suggest the presence of the HIV virus?                               
               Other History:                                                       
           20. Did she have any health problems as a child?                         
                                                                                    
           21. Was hospitalization or surgery ever necessary?                       
           22. Has she ever had any serious accidents?                              
           23. Are both her parents living? If not, what was the cause of death?    
                                                                                    
           24. Are her brothers and/or sisters still alive? If not, what was the cause of
               death? If so, how is their health?                                   
                                                                                    
           25. Does the client have children? If so, are they still alive? How is their
               health? If not, what was the cause of death?                         
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 55 (1 cols) ===
four                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
             H                                                                      
                OW      TO                                                          
                              C                                                     
                                 ONDUCT            THE                              
                                                            F                       
                                                              IRST                  
               I                                                                    
                 NTERVIEW              WITH       A                                 
                                                      F                             
                                                         AMILY                      
           I                                                                        
            n almost any agency or institution, it is highly likely that you will be
           seeing families from time to time. However, “seeing families” is not the 
           same as doing family therapy. You may occasionally meet with a child’s   
           entire family in order to get a sense of his day-to-day life. You may see
           parents for guidance about handling particular problems in the family. You
           will certainly see families if you are working in a foster care or child 
           welfare agency. If you work in a medical setting, you may meet with a    
           family to discuss issues concerning the hospitalization or medical treatment
                                                                                    
           of one member. These situations are common; however, they are not the    
           same as working in an agency where family treatment is the principal form
           of therapy or where you and the rest of the treatment team have the option
                                                                                    
           of selecting family therapy because you feel it will be the most efficient and
           helpful intervention.                                                    
                                                                                    
               This chapter introduces some basic concepts about family therapy. It 
           describes how to conduct a first interview with a family and provides some
           guidelines as to what you are looking for in assessing how a family      
                                                                                    
           functions and whether or not this family is suitable for family therapy. 
           Much of what is described should be useful in understanding the dynamics 
           of any family meeting, regardless of whether or not you and the treatment
                                                                                    
           team necessarily see family therapy as the best-or only-intervention.    
               As in the chapter on interviewing an adult client, we will start by going
                                                                                    
           chronologically through the experience of conducting the first interview 
           with a family. Before we begin, though, it is necessary to set aside our 
           previous definition of what constitutes “the client.” In individual treatment
                                                                                    
           you have become accustomed to assessing the symptoms and problems and    
           strengths of one person and evaluating the impact of family relationships on

=== Page 56 (1 cols) ===
that individual. In family therapy the whole family is considered the client
           and your focus will be on the interactions between and among family      
           members.                                                                 
                                                                                    
               Even the language of family therapy is different. It derives principally
           from “systems theory” and assumes that communication is circular: that is,
                                                                                    
           every action produces a reaction; every message will produce a response. In
           systems theory this is known as a loop, but it might be more useful to   
           conceptualize the whole family as a balloon: if you squeeze it one place it
                                                                                    
           bulges someplace else, and that bulge constitutes a symptoma symptom     
           which is usually the reason why the family is seeking help. The job of the
                                                                                    
           family therapist is to figure out what’s causing the family to feel squeezed.
               In thinking about the idea of a family symptom, it is useful to      
           remember that the symptom usually shows up in one of five places. The    
                                                                                    
           first possibility is in one of the parents. The second is in the relationship
           between the parents. The third is between a parent and a child. The fourth
           is between children. And the fifth is in one of the children.            
                                                                                    
               When the symptom appears in a child, some other agency may be        
           involved in sending him for treatment. For instance, he may be truant, or
                                                                                    
           may have become involved with the courts because of some delinquent      
           behavior, or may have been identified as at risk for substance abuse. Or the
           family itself may seek help, believing it is the child who “needs to change,”
                                                                                    
           because he is unmanageable, withdrawn, won’t eat, or picks fights with his
           siblings. In clinical terms, this makes the child the “identified patient.”
                                                                                    
               Regardless of whether the family sees its problem as only one member,
           when you do a family interview it is important for you to ask yourself one
           fundamental question: How might this symptom, even though it appears to  
                                                                                    
           involve only one person, be serving the whole family? By bearing this    
           question in mind you will continue to address the whole problem and not be
           diverted to a consideration of only one aspect or one person’s behavior. 
                                                                                    
               For example, an adolescent who is truant or experimenting with drugs 
           may appear at first to be doing these things for no other purpose than to hurt
                                                                                    
           his parents and undermine their goals for him-or even his own stated goals
           for himself. You may eventually discover, however, that he actually knows
           the parents’ relationship is in trouble and that he misbehaves in order to
                                                                                    
           keep the family from falling apart. After all, if a child is in trouble, parents
           will often set aside their own differences in order to try and help.

=== Page 57 (1 cols) ===
Another way of asking the same question is to say to yourself, “What 
           would be going on in this family if this symptom didn’t exist?” In the case
           of the above situation, the errant child might have sensed that unless he
                                                                                    
           became the focus of the stress in the family his parents would be constantly
           arguing or his father might simply stop coming home. So, the child’s     
                                                                                    
           symptom solves the family problem. This, then, is a key concept in thinking
           about how families work; that is, the symptom is often the solution-albeit,
           an unhappy or dysfunctional one-to the family’s problem.                 
                                                                                    
               Given this framework, let us look at the course of the first family  
           session. In general, you will receive a phone call or a request for help from
                                                                                    
           one of the parents, but that does not necessarily mean that the parents will
           be seeking family therapy. Therefore, you need to discuss with your      
           supervisor ahead of time whether or not your agency has guidelines for if,
                                                                                    
           and when, you invite the entire family to attend the first meeting-even  
           though you cannot yet know whether the problem requires individual or    
           family treatment.                                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                   REMEMBER          TO   ASK    YOURSELF                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                How  might this symptom be a solution to some other problem         
                the family is having?                                               
                                                                                    
                What might that problem be?                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               If it is your agency’s perspective that the whole family should be   
                                                                                    
           evaluated at the start, you should attempt to arrange a first interview with as
           many members of the family as possible. Then it is your task during the  
           first interview, if it seems appropriate, to redefine the problem as one that
                                                                                    
           affects the whole family.                                                
               Of course, such a redefinition is not possible unless you can see the
           whole family. However, if the client has not called your agency asking for
                                                                                    
           family treatment, it is quite common to encounter some resistance to the 
           idea that everyone should come for the first meeting. Pay attention to the

=== Page 58 (1 cols) ===
form of that resistance, because it may give you your first clue as to how the
           family operates, and perhaps to important cultural differences about family
           roles.                                                                   
                                                                                    
               For example, if a wife says that her husband is too busy to come in, 
           you may have acquired useful information about who is considered         
                                                                                    
           responsible for taking care of the children, or some clue to a potential 
           conflict between the husband and wife, or some information that the family
           is protecting the father, or any of a number of other possibilities.     
                                                                                    
               Nevertheless, if your goal is to conduct a family interview, then your
           task is to get as many people there as possible. In fact, some family    
                                                                                    
           therapists would argue that you should not conduct a first interview without
           all members of the family present. This might be most easily accomplished
           by explaining that it is the policy of your agency to see all family members,
                                                                                    
           including young children, for at least one interview. The reason to      
           encourage the presence of young children is that they are often remarkably
           candid in comparison with older children or adults, who have already     
                                                                                    
           learned the family rules about what is permissible to talk about and what
           isn’t.                                                                   
                                                                                    
               Even the presence of an infant can be informative, since the birth of a
           new child very often affects the feelings and relationships between siblings
           or between mother and father. So if the parent refuses to bring a child  
                                                                                    
           because “he is too young” or “he won’t sit still,” you might also be hearing
           information about the family’s discomfort in sharing information with    
                                                                                    
           children, or the special role one child may play in the family, or the   
           possibility that it might actually be that youngest child who needs attention
           or help.                                                                 
                                                                                    
               When you are having this conversation about who should attend the    
           first meeting, it is important to remember that “the family” does not    
           necessarily consist of a mother and father and children. The general rule, in
                                                                                    
           inviting people to participate, is to consider everyone living in the    
           household-be they uncles, grandparents, boyfriends, or foster children-as
                                                                                    
           part of the family. Further, if it is your impression that other significant
           people have a critical influence on the family’s behavior, you should    
           encourage them to come even if they don’t live on the premises.          
                                                                                    
               It has probably begun to dawn on you that you could easily find      
           yourself preparing for an interview with a dozen people of all ages. This

=== Page 59 (1 cols) ===
prospect raises another significant difference between individual and family
           therapy; that is, regardless of how few people attend, if you are accustomed
           to seeing only one client at a time, your first family interview will almost
                                                                                    
           certainly feel chaotic by comparison. The antidote to this feeling-and an
           important principle of family therapy-is that the therapist conducting a first
                                                                                    
           family interview plays a much more active, “take-charge” role.           
               As we proceed through the interview, you will acquire a clearer sense
           of how and when to do this, but first it is important for you to arrange a
                                                                                    
           space where there is room for everyone to be seated, even if that space is
           not ideal. It is also important for you to go out and greet the family-all of
                                                                                    
           the family. The latter is emphasized because you want each family member 
           to understand that you value his or her participation. So, you must greet
           everyone individually, by name, regardless of age. Once in your office,  
                                                                                    
           allow the family members to seat themselves in whatever positions they   
           find comfortable. Be alert to the choices they make.                     
               Does one person tell the others where to sit? Do mother and father sit
                                                                                    
           next to each other? Does one child sit at the far edge of the group? Does a
           child sit between the parents? Does grandma encourage the children to sit
                                                                                    
           with her? As family members settle in, they will often give you a graphic
           representation of which individuals are allies, who is the outsider, who is
           designated to protect whom, etc.                                         
                                                                                    
               During this getting-acquainted phase of the interview, you will also get
           some sense of who wanted to come to see you and who didn’t. You may be   
                                                                                    
           surprised to discover that the child who was identified as the problem is, in
           fact, eager to be there. Conversely, you may discover that he is there   
           because the family or some outside agency insisted. You may get a sense of
                                                                                    
           who feels things can get better and who feels they are hopeless. But your
           primary task at this stage is to make the family members feel that you are
           interested in each of them.                                              
                                                                                    
               At some point you will sense that the introductions are over, or     
           someone in the family may raise the issue of why they are here. If no one
                                                                                    
           does, you should help make the transition to a less social and more working
           relationship with a simple question, such as “What brings you here?” or  
           “How can we be of help to you?” As with the individual, you want to hear 
                                                                                    
           the family’s story, but that is complicated by the fact that there is more than
           one person present to tell it. If someone initiates the storytelling, that person

=== Page 60 (1 cols) ===
is likely to be the spokesperson for the family. Very often that will be the
           person who made the initial contact.                                     
               If it is the father (or father-surrogate), this may give you an indication
                                                                                    
           that the family is organized along hierarchical lines, with each successive
           person in the family having less and less authority - and that may reflect a
                                                                                    
           significant ethnic or cultural value which must be respected if you are to be
           helpful. If it is the mother (or mother-surrogate), you may acquire some 
           further information about gender-related family roles and the importance of
                                                                                    
           matriarchy in that family or culture.                                    
               It is important to remember that eventually you need to provide      
                                                                                    
           everyone with an opportunity to comment on what he or she sees as the    
           family’s difficulty. In the language of family therapy this is known as  
           “joining” with each of the family members. Rather than allowing one      
                                                                                    
           person to speak for everyone and give an extended dissertation on why they
           are here, you are going to turn to Alex, after his mother has said, “Mary and
           Alex fight all the time, and that’s the problem the family has,” and ask Alex
                                                                                    
           what he sees as the problem. In so doing, you are letting everyone know  
           that you are an information-gatherer rather than an ally of any one person in
                                                                                    
           the family. Just as with the individual interview, you should think of   
           yourself as a traveler in a foreign country, only this time there are lots more
           people to talk to in order to find out what the customs are.             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                 REMEMBER          TO   ASK    EVERY     FAMILY                     
                                                                                    
                                    MEMBER                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                What he or she sees as the problem the family is having.            
                What effect the problem is having on his or her life at the         
                                                                                    
                moment.                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               As you are hearing each member’s perception of the difficulty the    
           family is having, you will be listening for key phrases the family uses, for
                                                                                    
           central themes that get repeated, for patterns of communication. All this

=== Page 61 (1 cols) ===
information is of obvious value to you in formulating an understanding of
           how each family member sees the problem and experiences its effects on   
           him or her.                                                              
                                                                                    
               A less obvious but equally important aspect of this phase of the     
           interview is that it allows the family members what might be their first 
                                                                                    
           opportunity to hear what their siblings or parents or children see as the
           problem. If you have begun to create a climate of concern and interested 
           listening, the family members may feel less need to defend themselves.   
                                                                                    
           They will be better able to hear-and think about-what others are saying. 
               This kind of joining also serves the purpose of making it clear that 
                                                                                    
           everyone will have a chance to be heard and that, at least for the moment,
           you will be in charge of who talks when. This is reassuring to families who
           are in conflict, although they may briefly present a united front until they
                                                                                    
           feel that it is safe to disagree.                                        
               Eventually, though, and sometimes in the first interview,            
           disagreements-or even arguments-may occur as one person is giving his or 
                                                                                    
           her interpretation of what the problem is. Pay attention to what happens 
           when there is a disagreement. Who does what to keep it from getting out of
                                                                                    
           hand? Do the parents act in concert or do they undermine each other? Does
           one child misbehave to draw attention away from the conflict? Does anyone
           threaten or exert an unnecessary amount of force? Do the adults look to you
                                                                                    
           to bring the situation under control?                                    
               If this last situation occurs-that is, the family looks to you to bring
                                                                                    
           behavior under control-you should try and avoid being cast in the role of
           policeman unless you are concerned that someone is going to get hurt.    
           Within reason, it is important to see how the parents manage-or don’t    
                                                                                    
           manage-at these times. If necessary, however, you should let people know 
           that they can say whatever they want here but they cannot do whatever they
           want here. You should reiterate that everyone will get a chance to speak but
                                                                                    
           that they cannot all talk at once or no one will ever be heard. Then return to
           eliciting each family member’s opinion of what the problem is.           
                                                                                    
               By proceeding in this way you reassure each member that he or she    
           will have an opportunity to speak, you discourage interruptions, and you 
           begin to establish an understanding that each person will be treated fairly
                                                                                    
           here. At this stage, you are essentially encouraging the family members to
           talk to you, rather than to each other, since they have probably been talking

=== Page 62 (1 cols) ===
to each other for years and something in their communications is failing 
           them.                                                                    
               Once you have heard each person’s description of the perceived       
                                                                                    
           difficulty, you want to get a sense of how the family members have been  
           handling the problem up until now. Very often a single person or behavior
                                                                                    
           has been identified as the cause, and the family has expended much time  
           and energy trying to control that person. But you are also listening for 
           strengths in the family’s problem-solving capacities and some clues as to
                                                                                    
           why the problem exists in the first place, so you can couch your comments
           about what you are hearing in the most positive terms rather than placing
                                                                                    
           blame or agreeing with the definition of one person as the problem.      
               For instance, an 18-year-old may complain that his parents don’t allow
           him any freedom. He may tell you that his mother listens to his phone calls
                                                                                    
           and his father makes him bring the car home at 10 o’clock, when all of his
           friends get to stay out until midnight.                                  
               If you are oriented toward assessing individual behavior and         
                                                                                    
           motivation, you may find yourself thinking that these are overprotective 
           parents who don’t understand anything about today’s adolescents. At such 
                                                                                    
           times it is essential to remember that this is a whole organism. The parents’
           attitude may very well reflect real knowledge about this young man’s     
           inability to tolerate too much responsibility. Or it may demonstrate     
                                                                                    
           something very important about the parents’ upbringing. You might        
           discover that they both come from families in which the parents paid less
                                                                                    
           attention than they should have to their children’s needs. So for these two
           people, the definition of being good parents may revolve around keeping  
           close track of their child. Or father might have a distant and conflicted
                                                                                    
           relationship with his own father and be determined to keep his son very  
           close, because he believes that if he doesn’t his son will eventually drift
           away, as he did from his father.                                         
                                                                                    
               The point is that you do not yet understand why the parents have taken
           what may seem, on the face of it, to be a rather extreme position. Therefore,
                                                                                    
           it is important to reflect their behavior in the most positive way possible.
           For instance, you might say to the adolescent, “Your parents are very    
           watchful,” or “Your parents are obviously very concerned about making    
                                                                                    
           sure you are okay.” Such a comment both reassures the parents that you are
           not going to attack their child-rearing philosophy and presents to the

=== Page 63 (1 cols) ===
adolescent another way of understanding his parents’ behavior that allows
           room for further exploration.                                            
               This example raises another important point about treating the whole 
                                                                                    
           family. Unlike individual treatment, your work is done in the here and now;
           that is, you are concerned with the interaction going on right at the moment.
                                                                                    
           So, unlike the first interview with an individual, you might discourage any
           extensive history of one family member in favor of allowing more         
           participation in discussing the current problem and the effect it is having on
                                                                                    
           each person’s life right now.                                            
               The exception to this, however, would be if you have reason to believe
                                                                                    
           that one family member, especially the one seen as the cause of the family’s
           problem, is facing some other serious emotional challenge, such as the   
           recent death of a significant person, or the early stages of recovery from
                                                                                    
           alcoholism, or a psychotic episode. None of these would necessarily be a 
           reason to rule out family treatment, but they may make the identified patient
           more vulnerable and less able to protect himself from his family’s attitudes
                                                                                    
           toward him. It is part of your job in the first interview to assess whether or
           not family therapy might be too difficult for that family member at this time
                                                                                    
           and to discuss with your supervisor and the treatment team whether it might
           be better to see family members in subgroups or in individual treatment. 
               Such exceptions aside, you are going to focus on the interactions    
                                                                                    
           within the family, rather than on each person’s past history and individual
           psychodynamics. As you are doing this, however, you are going to be alert
                                                                                    
           for the presence of “ghosts”: the echo of other people, dead or alive, whose
           behavior or attitudes might be having an influence on the family right now.
           For instance, in the example previously mentioned concerning the 18-year-
                                                                                    
           old, you might hear his mother say, “My mother always knew who I was on  
           the phone with.” This might be an indication that someone else’s attitudes
           and/or values are impinging on this family’s relationships.              
                                                                                    
               While you are listening to the various family members describe the   
           problem, you are also getting some sense of the context in which the     
                                                                                    
           problem has arisen. You are finding out if father just lost his job, or the
           family has recently moved, or a member of the family has just arrived or 
           left. All of these factors, and many others, can shift the balance in a family;
                                                                                    
           exploring them can be useful in assessing how the family adapts to change.
           This assessment, along with your growing knowledge of how the family has

=== Page 64 (1 cols) ===
coped in the past, will give you some indication of whether you are dealing
           with a longstanding dysfunction or a temporary roadblock that can be     
           moved aside, enabling the family to continue to grow and change.         
                                                                                    
               Another useful tool in assessing the family’s flexibility is to note how
           the communication system works. This will become clearer in the next     
                                                                                    
           phase of the interview, when you encourage family members to talk to each
           other about the problems they are facing. You might initiate this phase by
           suggesting that Alex tell his sister, with whom he is always fighting, what
                                                                                    
           his sister does that makes him want to hit her. If Alex starts to talk to his
           sister and mother interrupts, then you have some indication that she is the
                                                                                    
           “switchboard” in the family; that is, in this family people do not       
           communicate directly with each other. Their communications go through    
           the “switchboard,” where they may be stifled, altered, or transformed into
                                                                                    
           some more acceptable form.                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                   REMEMBER          TO   ASK    YOURSELF                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                What is the context in which this problem has arisen?               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Or father might interrupt mother, who has just interrupted Alex, and 
           you will discover that father always has the last word, or that mother and
           father are in conflict about how to raise their children, or that father is allied
                                                                                    
           with Alex and mother is allied with sister. Or sister may tell Alex why he
           does what he does, suggesting that in this family everyone “reads everyone
                                                                                    
           else’s mind” and that it is necessary to help family members understand that
           they are different people who do not always think alike.                 
               This phase will also provide clues to another important family       
                                                                                    
           dynamic: how well family members can tolerate differences. If one member 
           of the family seems to be an outsider, is that because that person disagrees
                                                                                    
           with the family consensus about what the problem is? Does anyone need to 
           smoothe over disagreements? Is there a stifling of opinions or a sense that
           “we don’t want to air our dirty linen in public”?

=== Page 65 (1 cols) ===
This latter phenomenon may be genuine discomfort with the new        
           experience of family therapy and will change as the family members       
           become more accustomed to the process. Or it may suggest more            
                                                                                    
           complicated fears about what might be said if differing opinions are freely
           aired. For instance, the family may know that mother is prone to serious 
                                                                                    
           depressions, which she attributes to “the constant bickering.” So enforced
           cheerfulness and a united front may be seen as necessary to keep mother  
           from getting sick and withdrawing from them.                             
                                                                                    
               Or the family may have a secret. There may be sexual abuse going on; 
           one parent and at least one child will be aware of this, but they may believe
                                                                                    
           the rest of the family members are not. Or there may be a secret that the
           parents have agreed to keep from the children, e.g., that mother’s father
           committed suicide. Or the secret may be far more benign, but nevertheless
                                                                                    
           something that some member of this particular family believes would be   
           devastating: for example, that mother was married before or father didn’t
           really graduate from college.                                            
                                                                                    
               Secrets are often a factor in dysfunctional families. They may be    
           shared with some members and not with others, thereby creating alliances 
                                                                                    
           and outsiders. Some, such as incest or alcoholism, certainly are a real threat
           to the family’s staying together. All of them give further indications of the
           way in which the family communicates. You must be alert to the possibility
                                                                                    
           that a family secret exists but not confuse it with discretion.          
               Discretion is related to another important question you should be    
                                                                                    
           asking yourself as you listen to the family members. That is, who’s in   
           charge? The simplest way to state this is: Are the parents the parents and the
           children the children? Is one child paying the bills or taking a younger 
                                                                                    
           brother to school because father is too anxious about money or mother is 
           afraid to leave the house? If father’s mother is living with the family, does
           she treat her son as another child in the family or does she recognize that
                                                                                    
           she is living in his home? Does mother share information about her sexual
           life with her son?                                                       
                                                                                    
               This latter example speaks to the issue of discretion and the        
           recognition that there are appropriate boundaries between generations that
           ought to be observed. A family that is too rigid about these boundaries may
                                                                                    
           eventually need your help in accepting the idea that the children are not
           likely to be devastated by the knowledge that, for example, their father did

=== Page 66 (1 cols) ===
not finish college. In fact, keeping such a secret in order to protect father
           may actually be doing more harm to the family than sharing it would.     
               On the other hand, with families where generational boundaries are   
                                                                                    
           blurred, where intimate details are shared without discretion, your job may
           be to focus the parents on re-establishing some appropriate generational 
                                                                                    
           lines and clarifying what roles each member of the family ought to be    
           playing. In other words, ask yourself whether this family needs your help to
           tell each other more or to tell each other less.                         
                                                                                    
               In family therapy, the final stage of the first interview is also somewhat
           different from that with an individual. Family therapists believe that it is
                                                                                    
           important for you to “reframe” the problem, particularly if the family   
           believes that the “problem” is one member of the family. What you are    
           trying to do is guide the family in the direction of understanding that this is
                                                                                    
           a mutual problem, a problem in the system, not with one person. In the   
           earlier example of the 18-year-old boy, you might say, “The issue here   
           seems to be that the three of you have very different ideas about how much
                                                                                    
           independence is good for your son. The effect of that difference is that he
           feels constrained and that one of you feels fearful and the other feels as if
                                                                                    
           you are not being a good parent. Perhaps in our next meeting we can begin
           exploring some middle ground where he feels like he has some             
           independence and you two feel less worried.”                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                  REMEMBER                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Always “reframe” the problem so no one is to blame and each         
                person can see how it is affecting his or her life.                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               This is similar to your job in the first individual interview, in that you
           are trying to find a definition of the issue the client is struggling with that
           sounds right to the client and constitutes some agreement between you as to
                                                                                    
           where you will focus your energies. It is different to the extent that your
           task with the family is to point out the effect the problem is having on each

=== Page 67 (1 cols) ===
member and on their interactions with each other, rather than dwelling on
           the behavior or feelings of just one person. Implicit in that is the     
           recommendation that the whole family continue to come in for help.       
                                                                                    
               Family members may or may not agree with you. If they agree, you     
           will make arrangements for future meetings at a time that promotes the   
                                                                                    
           possibility that all members of the family will be able to come. Without 
           such a mutually convenient time, you run the risk of the family’s again  
           deciding who needs help or of only those members coming who feel it is a 
                                                                                    
           good idea. You need to make clear to the family that that is not helpful or
           productive, that even though you may meet with different combinations of 
                                                                                    
           family members from time to time, your contract is with the whole family.
               If the family members disagree with your recommendation, you have    
           that much more information about the depth of their fears about sharing  
                                                                                    
           information, or about what it would mean to change, or about how intensely
           the family feels the necessity to protect someone. You also have a dilemma.
               An experienced family therapist might tell the family that she cannot
                                                                                    
           be of help if the family is unwilling to be seen as a whole and make a   
           referral to some other agency that focuses on individual treatment.      
                                                                                    
           However, given your limited experience and the mandate of your agency, it
           probably makes more sense for you to suggest that you need to think about
           how you could be most helpful and that you will call them in a few days. 
                                                                                    
           During that time you should present the case to your supervisor and the  
           treatment team and get some guidance on what to do next.                 
                                                                                    
               The exception to that would be if you feel that the identified patient (or
           some other family member) is in danger, in which case you might arrange  
           to see that person for an individual session where he may be able to speak
                                                                                    
           more freely. This is especially important if you sense that physical or sexual
           abuse might be going on, or if you feel that one family member is a danger
           to himself or someone else.                                              
                                                                                    
               Making such an exception puts you in the position of verifying the   
           family’s belief that only one person has a problem. You will have to make a
                                                                                    
           judgment call and accept that setback for a while if the situation seems 
           serious enough, bearing in mind that at some future point you will look for
           another opportunity to work with the whole family.                       
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 68 (1 cols) ===
five                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
             H                                                                      
                OW      TO                                                          
                              C                                                     
                                 ONDUCT            THE                              
                                                            F                       
                                                              IRST                  
                I                                                                   
                  NTERVIEW              WITH        A                               
                                                       C                            
                                                          HILD                      
           I                                                                        
            f you are like many clinicians, your first wish would be to skip this   
           chapter altogether, either because you work in a setting where children are
           not seen or because you are more comfortable working with adults. Be that
           as it may, even if you were to confine your case load to adults, it is unlikely
           you could see only adults who had no children. And even if you were to   
           succeed in doing that, it is more than unlikely that you could acquire a case
           load of adults who had never been children themselves!                   
               In other words, there are circumstances under which a baseline       
                                                                                    
           knowledge of child development and some fundamental skills for           
           conducting an interview with a child are called for. Let us begin by     
           exploring some of the differences and similarities between interviewing  
                                                                                    
           adults and interviewing children.                                        
               First, let us agree on a working definition of a “child” for the purposes
                                                                                    
           of this chapter. Although many of the premises that will be presented here
           are true of both younger and older children, we are going to focus on    
           children in the age range of five to ten years old, because unlike much  
                                                                                    
           younger children they have language and have begun interacting with the  
           outside world, and unlike older children and adolescents their decisions and
           actions are still governed primarily by their caretakers.                
                                                                                    
               This last aspect raises the first significant difference between children
           and adults coming for therapy-that is, children are seldom voluntary clients
                                                                                    
           in the traditional use of the term. They rarely have any sense on their own
           that they need therapy or even that such a thing as therapy exists.      
               Therapists, too, are often puzzled by or suspect of the notion that a
                                                                                    
           child might need therapy. After all, childhood is supposed to be a time of
           innocence, when life is carefree. Even though our adult clients frequently

=== Page 69 (1 cols) ===
describe vivid memories of the unhappiness they experienced in childhood,
           it is still disconcerting to think that children can experience so much pain at
           such a young age. However, the sad reality is that they do, that they often
                                                                                    
           know they do, and that they may need your help long before they          
           understand what it is that you do.                                       
                                                                                    
               Most often, children will come to your attention because someone else
           thinks they have a problem. School guidance counselors, teachers,        
           pediatricians, camp counselors, child welfare agencies, or clinics that see
                                                                                    
           only adults may all be referral sources. Or parents themselves will become
           concerned about their child’s mood or-more frequently-behavior.          
                                                                                    
               As with all referrals, you will want to note the source, because it will
           be your first indication of who is worried about this child or feels the child
           is in trouble. If it is not the parents, then the parents may not necessarily
                                                                                    
           agree that the child has a problem, and might not have sought treatment if it
           weren’t for a threat that the child will be suspended from school or have to
           stay home from day camp. That is something you must keep in mind as you  
                                                                                    
           prepare for your initial contact with the parents, so that you do not presume
           that they necessarily understand how therapy works or that it might be   
                                                                                    
           helpful to their child.                                                  
               And you will want to hold in your mind the question, “Why now?”      
           That is, what are the current pressures or changes in the life of the child that
                                                                                    
           are causing attention to be drawn to her at this moment? Is the change that
           has occurred a change in the child, or is it a change in the circumstances
                                                                                    
           surrounding her, such as a divorce or death of a significant person? In other
           words, is the child exhibiting the effects of her experiences or is someone
           else anticipating that she will or should?                               
                                                                                    
               Having framed those questions for yourself, your next task will be to
           organize a space where you can interview a child. As you begin to do so, 
           remember that your purpose is not to entertain the child; rather, it is, as
                                                                                    
           always, to gather information that will help you to be helpful to her. Once
           you understand how most children of this age communicate, you will have  
                                                                                    
           little difficulty organizing some basic tools for gathering information. 
               Unlike adults, who possess experiential and cognitive tools for      
           describing their lives mostly through words, children often act out their
                                                                                    
           feelings and their fears, their worries and their understanding-or       
           misunderstanding-of their surroundings. Their form of communication is

=== Page 70 (1 cols) ===
symbolic and metaphorical. It can be elaborate and complex, filled with rich
           fantasies and images, or barren and terrifying. It is called play.       
               This notion-that play is an expression of the inner life of the child; that
                                                                                    
           play is language-may seem contrary to all you have been taught about the 
           meaning of the word “play” as an activity done solely for pleasure. That is a
                                                                                    
           myth about play and a myth about children-that they don’t have a care in 
           their heads. Ironically, it is the exact opposite of the other prevalent myth
           about children-that they are really little adults.                       
                                                                                    
               The truth is children are neither as uncomplicated as we sometimes   
           wish to believe nor as sophisticated as they sometimes appear to be. As  
                                                                                    
           children acquire language, it seems as if they understand not just the same
           words but also the same meanings as adults. If one stops to think, it is 
           obvious that children cannot possibly understand the things it has taken 
                                                                                    
           adults a lifetime to learn; however, this is still a presumption one can easily
           make around children, and one that you must guard against as you begin to
           search with the child for the meaning of her experience as she understands
                                                                                    
           it.                                                                      
               So how, you rightly wonder, can you communicate with a child if she  
                                                                                    
           cannot put her feelings into words? Isn’t that going to make it impossible to
           do therapy? Not necessarily. In fact, one of the interesting paradoxes of
           child treatment is that, although children have a harder time formulating
                                                                                    
           feelings in words, they are also less inhibited by social pressures so that in
           some respects they have greater freedom than adults to express their     
                                                                                    
           feelings. Also, just because a child cannot formulate her experience in a
           neat sentence does not mean that she won’t recognize how she feels if you
           describe it in language she can understand. And finally, you are not trying
                                                                                    
           to help someone who has lived for twenty or thirty or forty years trying to
           accommodate herself to her unhappiness. The source of a child’s          
           unhappiness or confusion is going on right in the here and now. Your job is
                                                                                    
           to create a climate in which that unhappiness or confusion can be taken  
           seriously, clarified, and as much as possible changed by those concerned 
                                                                                    
           with the child so she can continue to grow and learn without interference.

=== Page 71 (1 cols) ===
REMEMBER                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Play is language.                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Here’s how you start that process. Find a quiet place where you can  
           meet with the child with as few distractions as possible, both for the child
           and for you. If you are using your office, clear away things that might be of
                                                                                    
           interest to a child if you don’t want her to play with them. After you have
           become accustomed to interviewing children this will be less of an issue 
                                                                                    
           because you will become adept at setting reasonable, clear limits; however,
           initially it can be distracting for you to be worrying that the child is going to
           break something you treasure. Although this rarely happens, it can be a  
                                                                                    
           source of anxiety.                                                       
               Next, provide enough chairs for the child and any other family       
           members whose presence seems necessary. Parents may bring all the        
                                                                                    
           siblings to the waiting room, or an uncle who is visiting from Detroit;  
           however, if possible, you want to have clarified with your supervisor    
                                                                                    
           beforehand whether the first interview should be with just the parents and
           the child about whom there is concern or whether other family members    
           should be included. Make sure you have enough room in your office for    
                                                                                    
           everyone, or find another suitable space.                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                THINGS      TO   DO   BEFORE       YOUR     FIRST                   
                                                                                    
                        INTERVIEW        WITH    A  CHILD                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Arrange a suitable space and have paper and pencils                 
                                                                                    
                available.                                                          
                Ask your supervisor who should be in the interview and when         
                they should be there.

=== Page 72 (1 cols) ===
Ask your supervisor what to say to the parents and to the           
                child about confidentiality.                                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               That space should have a small table where you can leave two chairs at
                                                                                    
           a comfortable distance-one for you and one for the child. If you have no 
           such table, use a corner of your desk. Once you have set that up, it would be
           nice if you had a few toys available.                                    
                                                                                    
               However, there are two important words in that sentence. The first is
           “nice”-not necessary. The second is a “few.” Remember, your purpose is   
                                                                                    
           not to overwhelm the child with choices but to give her tools for expressing
           herself. If you do have access to toys, that is where the importance of  
           choosing only a few comes in. When you are choosing toys, think about the
                                                                                    
           child’s age and race and gender but don’t make your decisions based solely
           on those criteria. Children are imaginative. They can find a way to express
                                                                                    
           themselves with very few toys.                                           
               A few small figures that resemble a family are most useful. These can
           be human figures or animals. Perhaps add a few toy cars. Maybe a teddy   
                                                                                    
           bear or other stuffed toy. Maybe a board game. Any of these would be nice.
           None is essential. In fact, the only essential tools in a first interview with a
           child are some pencils with erasers and some pieces of standard size paper.
                                                                                    
           If you have crayons or markers or colored paper, better yet. If you don’t you
           can still conduct a very informative and engaging interview with a child.
                                                                                    
               So now you have everything set up and the parents and the child are  
           out in the waiting room. As with any interview, you are now going to go out
           and greet each member of the family-and you are going to greet them all in
                                                                                    
           the same manner. That means you are going to say hello and introduce     
           yourself to all of them. It also means that your voice and demeanor are not
                                                                                    
           going to get childish when you talk to a child. If a child talks baby talk it is
           significant. If a therapist talks baby talk it is inappropriate.         
               Your agency or supervisor may have a particular preference for the   
                                                                                    
           order in which you see family members, e.g., parents first without the child,
           child first, etc. If there are no specific recommendations, it is probably
           preferable to begin your interview with the parents and the child together,
                                                                                    
           unless you know beforehand that some catastrophic event has occurred of

=== Page 73 (1 cols) ===
which the child is unaware-e.g., a death in the family, a pronouncement that
           someone (possibly even the child) has a terminal illness, a rape. Under  
           these circumstances or if the parents specifically request it, it would be best
                                                                                    
           to begin the interview without the child. If you do so, however, try to  
           provide something for the child to do in the waiting room and explain to her
                                                                                    
           that you are going to meet first with her parents but that she will get a
           chance to come in very soon. Also, if the child is quite young, you may  
           want to show her where your room is and what the number is on your door  
                                                                                    
           so she knows where to find her mommy or daddy if she needs one of them.  
               So you would prefer to start out with everyone together. Your second 
                                                                                    
           choice would be with the parents and not the child. It would be least    
           desirable to start out by seeing the child alone. In order to appreciate why
           that would be so, it is necessary to pause for a moment and think about  
                                                                                    
           what it must be like for parents to feel-or to be told by someone else-that
           their child needs therapy.                                               
               When they make the decision-for whatever reason-to bring their child 
                                                                                    
           for treatment, virtually all parents, even the most sophisticated about  
           therapy for themselves, may feel sadness or confusion or, most importantly,
                                                                                    
           feelings that perhaps they have not done their job as well as they might 
           have. They may be worried that their child is going to feel more understood
           by you than by them, or like you better, or they may believe that you are
                                                                                    
           going to blame them for their child’s problems. These feelings may never 
           be put into words; however, it is essential for you to assume, in every  
                                                                                    
           interview with parents, that they are at risk of being made to feel inadequate
           or guilty or disrespected. And you must also remember that, if that happens,
           it is very likely that you will lose the child as a client.              
                                                                                    
               Why? Because, as we said before, children of this age are not        
           voluntary clients. They do not come for help on their own. They do not pay
           for their own therapy. They do not negotiate in the world on their own.  
                                                                                    
           They cannot, usually, get on a bus and come to your office; even if they 
           could, if their parents didn’t want them to, they almost certainly would not
                                                                                    
           do so. Even if the child somehow came on her own, the therapy would      
           probably not be of much help. So the long and the short of it is that if you
           have not engaged the parents or caretakers in helping a child, then the child
                                                                                    
           will probably not get help.

=== Page 74 (1 cols) ===
Engaging the parents or caretakers may not be easy-not just because  
           they may experience all the feelings described above, but also because your
           feelings toward the parents may occasionally be hostile or negative or   
                                                                                    
           blaming. You may even wonder how you are going to sit through an         
           interview with some parents.                                             
                                                                                    
               One can wish that no such feelings might ever occur. However, as is  
           evident in Chapter Eleven on abuse and neglect, in most therapeutic settings
           today one cannot avoid seeing children who have sometimes been left      
                                                                                    
           unprotected when they shouldn’t have been, or witnessed things they should
           not have seen, or been given responsibilities they should not have had.  
                                                                                    
           Under such circumstances you may feel angry at the parents or experience a
           powerful wish simply to rescue a child. Those feelings are not so unusual in
           some situations and are often understandable. However, if you cannot shed
                                                                                    
           them by talking with your supervisor or find some other way to set them  
           aside so you can make a connection with the parents, then the child is better
           served by your turning the case over to a colleague who can.             
                                                                                    
               So, having thought that over, let us assume you have moved ahead and 
           are preparing to see the parents and child. Before you do so, however, you
                                                                                    
           want to make particular note of the child’s age. The reason to do that is
           because, along with all the other observations you would routinely make as
           you initiate any first interview (unusual physical characteristics of family
                                                                                    
           members, who says what to whom, tone of the communications), you will    
           also want to ask yourself one crucial question: Does this child look and 
                                                                                    
           sound and act her age?                                                   
               That may seem like an odd or judgmental question, but it is not. It does
           not necessarily mean that the child sounds younger or looks younger than 
                                                                                    
           she is. On the contrary, it may mean that the child looks or sounds or seems
           to behave like a much older child. In either case, it is noteworthy because
           children frequently demonstrate that they are in trouble by being out of 
                                                                                    
           developmental “sync.” And your first indication of that may very well be in
           a child’s initial demeanor.                                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                               ASK    YOURSELF

=== Page 75 (1 cols) ===
Does the child look and sound and act her age?                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               So you want to be alert to the child’s “apparent” age versus         
           chronological age. That doesn’t mean that you must know or remember      
                                                                                    
           from your own childhood what a five- or six- or a seven-year-old “ought to
           do.” Be assured that you will have no difficulty recognizing the         
                                                                                    
           inappropriateness of a seven-year-old being the spokesperson for her     
           mother. And you are not looking for subtleties at this stage. If a child sucks
           her thumb or hides behind her mother, you might not be certain if that were
                                                                                    
           unusual for a six-year-old but you would almost certainly be struck by it in
           a ten-year-old. You also want to note whether that behavior changes over 
           the course of the interview, as parents and child both begin to feel more
                                                                                    
           comfortable. And you will especially want to note changes in behavior    
           when the parents leave the room and you are alone with the child.        
                                                                                    
               But before you are alone with the child, you are going to start the  
           interview, if one of the family members doesn’t start it for you. If it is left to
           you, it is most helpful to initiate the relationship in a relaxed tone with as
                                                                                    
           neutral a question as possible, for example, “How can I be helpful to you?”
           or “So, what brings you here?” Even though these questions sound banal,  
                                                                                    
           their purpose is to begin defining your role-for the child, in particular-as a
           caring, neutral adult. You are not a teacher. You are not a parent to this
           child. You’re a friendly grown-up who is going to stay at a respectful   
                                                                                    
           physical and emotional distance from a child until the child feels       
           comfortable and safe with you. You will smile at the child; perhaps she will
           smile back, perhaps she won’t. You will try, after some conversation with
                                                                                    
           her parents, to engage her in the discussion. Perhaps she will join in and
           perhaps she won’t.                                                       
                                                                                    
               Before that happens, however, you will begin to get the parents’ or  
           caretakers’ definition of the problem. What you are likely to hear about a
           child in this age range is something like “she is crying all the time” or
                                                                                    
           “hitting other children at school” or “not paying attention to anyone” or
           some other behavioral manifestation of her feelings. You will also want to
                                                                                    
           get a sense of whether that definition of the problem came from someone  
           else, and if so, whether or not the parents concur with that other person’s

=== Page 76 (1 cols) ===
perception. At some point, if it is indicated, you will also want to get 
           written permission to speak with that person yourself.                   
               While you are listening to the parents, you are hearing something also
                                                                                    
           of their discomfort with the problem. Sometimes that will manifest itself in
           the parents’ describing their own inadequacies or other distressing things
                                                                                    
           going on in their lives that make raising this child difficult. Sometimes you
           will hear anger or frustration with the child for not trying harder or being
           more obedient or listening. Sometimes you will hear just plain           
                                                                                    
           bewilderment.                                                            
               Sometimes you will hear things that you wonder if the child should be
                                                                                    
           hearing: vivid details of a divorce or a murder or any number of other   
           situations that you cannot imagine talking about with a five-year-old in the
           room. If you are uncomfortable, let the parent know that there will be an
                                                                                    
           opportunity to discuss such details while the child is not present.      
               Grown-ups sometimes think that children are not listening, even when 
           they are three feet away. Or parents feel such a sense of urgency to talk
                                                                                    
           about an issue that they overlook the child’s presence. At these moments,
           they may even be glad if you stop them from saying something which they  
                                                                                    
           would ordinarily not say around their child. Sometimes, though, a parent 
           will simply go on talking about it anyway, and you will get a glimpse of the
           content of this child’s everyday life.                                   
                                                                                    
               While you are listening to the parent, focus part of your attention on
           the nonverbal communication in the room. How is the child behaving while 
                                                                                    
           the parent is describing the problem? Do the two of them make eye contact?
           Do they touch each other? Does the child look at you when you look at her?
           Does she appear not to listen? Does she fidget? Does she move closer or  
                                                                                    
           further away from a parent? Does the child seem afraid? Is a parent trying
           to describe the problem in a way that might be comforting to the child?  
           Does the child seem comforted? Disinterested? Is she quiet or is she trying
                                                                                    
           to do things to distract herself, or you, or her parents?                
               When the parents have given an initial description of the problem and
                                                                                    
           you have noted it, take the opportunity to draw the child into the discussion.
           Usually the best place to start is by asking the child, in an interested,
           relaxed way, if she knows why mommy or daddy (or whoever) has brought    
                                                                                    
           her here. You are going to ask that question, knowing full well that most
           children don’t have a clue why they are in your office.

=== Page 77 (1 cols) ===
The purpose of the question is to begin eliciting the child’s        
           understanding of why she thinks she has been brought to you and to get a 
           sense of her expectations and concerns. She will probably respond in one of
                                                                                    
           three ways. First, she might shrug and say she doesn’t know or she forgot;
           at this point her parents will express some surprise, since one of them  
                                                                                    
           almost certainly told her something about the purpose of your meeting. Or
           she might express some belief that you are a “doctor”; you can take this 
           opening to find out what she thinks is going to happen to her at this    
                                                                                    
           “doctor’s office.” Or she will tell you that she is here because she is a
           problem, e.g., “I was bad,” or “I threw food.” If a child does the latter, she
                                                                                    
           may or may not also follow it with some explanation intended to ward off 
           the feeling of responsibility, such as, “Denise sits next to me. She always
           gets me in trouble,” or “My teacher picks on me.”                        
                                                                                    
               Whatever the child’s response is, it will certainly illustrate an    
           important difference between children and adults: that is, children do not
           think causally in the sense of connecting their actions with their feelings.
                                                                                    
           You may hear many explanations of why she does what she does from a      
           child of this age, but you are unlikely to hear her say, “I hit other children
                                                                                    
           because I am angry at my new stepfather,” or “If my mother didn’t yell at
           me all the time I wouldn’t cry when my teacher tells me to sit down.”    
               You, on the other hand, may arrive at such a conclusion in very short
                                                                                    
           order. You may find yourself saying to yourself, “Boy, if my father spoke to
           me that way, I would hit other kids too,” or, “I’d be depressed if I was seven
                                                                                    
           years old and had so many responsibilities.” It is easy at such times to 
           identify with the child and to want to make her feel better right away. But it
           is important to remember that you cannot make a child feel better if you 
                                                                                    
           don’t understand what is really making her feel bad in the first place.  
               The way her father talks to her may be secondary or irrelevant or only
           happen today in your office because her father is nervous or embarrassed or
                                                                                    
           afraid that there is something terribly wrong with his child. Or you may 
           discover over time that this child’s responsibilities-however inappropriate
                                                                                    
           you may consider them for a seven-year-old-are actually a source of great
           pride to her. So the first reason to ask the child why she thinks she is in your
           office is to begin the process of eliciting her feelings about herself.  
                                                                                    
               The second purpose in asking for the child’s understanding is because
           it gives you an opportunity-no matter how negatively the parents may have

=== Page 78 (1 cols) ===
described the child’s role in the problem-to frame for all of them the most
           positive possible explanation for why they are here. Generally, after you
           have listened to the child’s explanation you will want to let her know that
                                                                                    
           she is here not only because she is doing or saying things that may be   
           upsetting to other people but also because her parents are worried about her.
                                                                                    
               This perspective is usually quite reassuring to both parents and child.
           For the parents, it means that you appreciate their concern for their child-
           even though they may be frustrated by her or not know exactly what to do 
                                                                                    
           to be helpful-and that you respect their good judgment in bringing her for
           help, even though they may still have some doubts about whether it is really
                                                                                    
           necessary. For the child, it is some reassurance that her parents have not
           brought her to you as punishment, which many children believe regardless 
           of what their parents tell them beforehand.                              
                                                                                    
               It is hoped that this reassurance will make it possible for the child, no
           matter how defensive she might appear to be, to acknowledge that she, too,
           is concerned about what is happening. This can often be accomplished by  
                                                                                    
           simply asking in a gentle way if she is also worried about herself. Most 
           children of this age can understand this question, but if the child doesn’t
                                                                                    
           seem to, you must get into the habit of simplifying your language so that the
           child can understand.                                                    
               Once asked, a child will often acknowledge that she is worried or    
                                                                                    
           scared or completely confused by what she is saying or doing or that she 
           has no idea why it is that she is feeling so sad or angry. Parents are often
                                                                                    
           surprised to discover that their child knows something is wrong or is feeling
           so helpless or bad about herself, and this realization can help create   
           empathy and a working alliance between you and the parents so you can set
                                                                                    
           about together to help their child.                                      
               Now that the child is a participant in the conversation, you can get 
           some of the basic information from her. For example, how old she is, what
                                                                                    
           school she goes to, what grade she is in, etc. You can also get more of a
           sense of the precipitant for the visit. For instance, what led to the    
                                                                                    
           suspension from school? Or when did her grandfather die? Or how did she  
           first find out that her parents were getting a divorce? The key to this part of
           the interview is simply to remember that, most especially with a child, these
                                                                                    
           are “who, what, when, where, how” questions-not why questions-and they   
           must be phrased in simple language the child can respond to.

=== Page 79 (1 cols) ===
Once you have engaged the child in the conversation, introduce the   
           idea that you would like to spend a little time alone with her-if that is okay
           with both parents and child-and that you will then meet with them together
                                                                                    
           again, at which time you will answer any questions the parents might have
           thought of in the interim. If the parents are comfortable with your being
                                                                                    
           alone with the child, ask the child if that is all right with her. If so, usher her
           parents out of the office.                                               
               If it is not all right with someone, take note of whom and how each  
                                                                                    
           responds to the idea of being separated from the other. Suggest to all of
           them that perhaps they will feel more comfortable in a little while about
                                                                                    
           mommy  or daddy leaving the room, and then proceed with the interview in 
           the manner about to be described, pausing from time to time to ask if it 
           would be okay now for the child to stay with you alone. Bear in mind,    
                                                                                    
           however, that it may take more than one interview for the child or one of
           the parents to tolerate being separated-regardless of whether or not you 
           think they should be able to separate. This behavior may reflect precisely
                                                                                    
           the kind of developmental lag that would indicate the child’s need for help.
               So, with or without a parent in the room, you are now going to turn  
                                                                                    
           your focus to the child. Pay keen attention to her tone and her gestures and
           her movements-especially if her parents have just left the room. Does she
           seem more relaxed? More tense? Does her voice get softer or louder? Does 
                                                                                    
           she look like she’s going to cry, or does she suddenly become physically 
           active? The reason to attend so carefully is that you are going to try and
                                                                                    
           match the style and speed of her gestures and voice so that you do not   
           overwhelm or frighten the child by your presence.                        
               Obviously, that does not mean that you are going to shout if the child
                                                                                    
           shouts or jump if she does. On the contrary, you are going to make sure you
           maintain your normal, steady speaking voice and a calm demeanor. But if  
           the child speaks very softly, or doesn’t speak at all, or seems timid or 
                                                                                    
           withdrawn, then you must go very slowly and quietly in your efforts to   
           engage her.                                                              
                                                                                    
               In either case, however, assuming that you have cleared a space or   
           have set up a table, move slowly and easily toward it, inviting the child to
           sit there with you. Make sure that the child has easy access to the pencils
                                                                                    
           and paper and that your chair is sufficiently far away that she is not going to
           feel intruded upon or crowded.

=== Page 80 (1 cols) ===
Children have very different senses of how comfortable they feel being
           close to other people. Some are used to being hugged a lot; others are   
           unaccustomed to having any adult other than their parents too near them; 
                                                                                    
           most have been warned to be careful of strangers. Despite the fact that you
           know why you are there- and that your intentions are the best-from the   
                                                                                    
           child’s point of view you are still a stranger.                          
               For this and many other reasons, it is best as a general rule not to touch
           a child unless you and your supervisor discuss a very particular         
                                                                                    
           circumstance under which it is indicated for therapeutic reasons. Children in
           hospitals and other kinds of institutional settings sometimes need physical
                                                                                    
           comforting or reassurance or even restraint, when their parents are not  
           available to them. But if you are seeing a child in an outpatient or     
           community setting where she is brought by parents or a caretaker, you could
                                                                                    
           confuse both the child and the parents’ sense of your role if you initiate the
           action of touching a child, however casually. And you might,             
           unintentionally, be inviting the child to touch you, which could eventually
                                                                                    
           make you uncomfortable.                                                  
               None of this is meant to suggest that you must recoil from a child who
                                                                                    
           wants to take your hand or sit in your lap. As with all other situations with
           children, this one needs to be handled in a friendly, clear way. But you 
           would certainly want to note any initiation of or persistence in this behavior
                                                                                    
           by a child, since it would be somewhat unusual, particularly if the two of
           you have never met before.                                               
                                                                                    
               So once you are both seated, you are going to begin, in an informal  
           way, a series of assessment drawings and questions. Again, you should have
           discussed with your supervisor whether taking notes is acceptable, or even
                                                                                    
           preferable, in the first interview with a child. If it is, you should write down
           the answers and comments the child makes throughout the interview as     
           close to verbatim as possible.                                           
                                                                                    
               But remember that children are curious about lots of things, and the 
           child may very well ask you what you are writing. If she does, tell her you
                                                                                    
           are writing down what she says. If she asks why, tell her it is because you
           think that what she says is important, or choose some other similar response
           that transmits to the child that you really are interested in what she says and
                                                                                    
           does.

=== Page 81 (1 cols) ===
The first thing you want to ask the child to do is to draw a picture of a
           person for you. Don’t specify age or gender or size or anything else. You
           just want her to draw a person. If she asks you questions about what you 
                                                                                    
           want the picture to be, try and leave it as much as possible up to the child.
           Don’t comment on the drawing if there are things missing, e.g., eyes or  
                                                                                    
           fingers or clothes. Your purpose here is not to get artistry or verisimilitude;
           it is to get the child to give you a representation of how she sees herself.
               Your supervisor can assist you in interpreting the details and the   
                                                                                    
           meaning of this drawing, as she can with any of the other basic drawings 
           you might ask a child to do in a first interview. These are a house, a tree,
                                                                                    
           and a picture of her family. Any or all of them will give you some       
           preliminary insight into the child’s inner world and her feelings about  
           herself, so you should discuss with your supervisor ahead of time which she
                                                                                    
           finds most useful.                                                       
               Most children will willingly do a drawing, although there is the     
           occasional child who will not. For the ones who will, be encouraging and 
                                                                                    
           interested and try to elicit some information about who is who in the family
           picture if the child doesn’t tell you, or who lives in the house and what it is
                                                                                    
           like inside, or what the person in the person picture does. Pay attention to
           the spontaneity and the richness or paucity of the child’s responses. If she
           has difficulty talking, does it seem like shyness, or difficulty in      
                                                                                    
           understanding what you are saying, or resentment at being asked to do    
           something, or simply intense concentration on the task? Does she erase a 
                                                                                    
           lot, or use a tiny corner of the page, or cross things out because she has
           made a mistake?                                                          
               Some of the questions may sound like they could be part of a mental  
                                                                                    
           status exam, and it can certainly be as useful a tool in assessing a child’s
           functioning as it is for an adult, provided, of course, that you remember that
           children see the world differently. For example, the normal inner life of a
                                                                                    
           young child is often filled with imaginary characters who should long ago
           have disappeared from an adult’s thinking. There are many other          
                                                                                    
           differences, which you will learn as you become more comfortable with    
           children; the point here is that you are going to continue to observe and
           listen and evaluate, just as you would in any other interview, even though
                                                                                    
           you may feel tempted to try and engage a child by sharing activities with

=== Page 82 (1 cols) ===
her, rather than encouraging her to do them. For example, you may find   
           yourself trying to get her to draw by offering to draw with her.         
               Eventually, if you enter into a therapeutic relationship with this child,
                                                                                    
           you will play games with her, or allow yourself to be designated as the  
           mean teacher, or hide behind the desk, but that will be because the child
                                                                                    
           initiates your role, sets the stage, and uses you as a character in some inner
           drama with which she is grappling. However, in this interview you are    
           establishing some preliminary parameters in your relationship with her that
                                                                                    
           will set you apart from other relationships she has known. Even though you
           may eventually play games with her, you are not a playmate, so do not try
                                                                                    
           and engage her by initiating play.                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                THINGS      TO   DO   DURING      YOUR      FIRST                   
                                                                                    
                        INTERVIEW        WITH    A  CHILD                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Remember   that it is not your purpose to entertain the child.      
                                                                                    
                Let the child establish the distance between you.                   
                Ask her to draw a person and a house, or a tree, or her             
                family.                                                             
                Ask her: If you could have three wishes, what would they be?        
                                                                                    
                Explore her answers.                                                
                Ask her: If you were going on a rocket ship to the moon and         
                there was one seat for you and one seat for someone else,           
                                                                                    
                whom  would you take with you? Explore her answer.                  
                Ask her: If you could be any animal, what animal would you          
                like to be? Explore her answer.                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               When she has finished her drawings, ask if she will leave them with  
           you. If she is resistant to that idea, suggest that she make copies of them to
                                                                                    
           take home with her or start a special folder with her name on it so she can
           see the pictures the next time she comes. If at all possible you want the
           drawings to remain with you so you and your supervisor can evaluate them

=== Page 83 (1 cols) ===
together. If the child refuses, try and duplicate them before she leaves and
           make a note to yourself of the nature of the difficulty that she has in giving
           them up. Does she cry or get angry or withdraw?                          
                                                                                    
               After the drawings, you will want to proceed to some questions that  
           will, it is hoped, illuminate for you some of the child’s concerns or feelings.
                                                                                    
           Your supervisor may have her own series of questions or a particular order
           in which she prefers to ask them. If not, the following are probably the most
           frequently used.                                                         
                                                                                    
               The first is: If you could have three wishes, what would they be? Write
           down the answers and, if applicable, explore each of them a little as you go.
                                                                                    
           For example, the child may wish for a big room, allowing for some        
           exploration of the crowded circumstances in which she lives. Or she may  
           wish for a pet because pets love you, or she may wish her mommy and      
                                                                                    
           daddy lived together, or any of a million other possibilities. Her wishes may
           be unique and complicated or seemingly simple and straightforward. In    
           either case, they will be her wishes, and will often provide, if not a laser
                                                                                    
           beam to guide you to the source of this particular child’s unhappiness, then
           at least the beginning of a trail of crumbs.                             
                                                                                    
               When you have finished with the three wishes ask the child: If you   
           were going on a rocket ship to the moon and there were only two seats-one
           for you and one for someone else-whom would you take with you? The       
                                                                                    
           answer to this question will give you a glimpse into the depths of the child’s
           feelings of attachment and tell you whom she regards as the most         
                                                                                    
           significant or necessary to her. You should not be surprised or comment  
           upon her choice, particularly if it is not the person you expected it to be.
           Children don’t always choose their mothers or fathers. Sometimes they    
                                                                                    
           choose a friend; in rare cases they choose to go alone. Whatever the child’s
           choice, you want to get a sense of why she picked that person. Perhaps it is
           her mother because her mother could take care of her on the moon; perhaps
                                                                                    
           it is her friend Billy because Billy is smarter than she is; perhaps it is her
           grandfather because her grandfather is dead and she misses him.          
                                                                                    
               After you have explored her reasons, go on to the last question: If you
           could be any animal, what animal would you like to be? By now you        
           probably have a sense of how you would follow up on the child’s answer,  
                                                                                    
           so it need not be elaborated upon here.

=== Page 84 (1 cols) ===
You and the child can then move on to a discussion of whether she    
           would like to come back to the clinic or not. This aspect of the conversation
           is not intended to leave the decision about therapy to the child, and most
                                                                                    
           children of this age would not expect to have a decision-making role in this
           any more than they would in going to see a pediatrician or going to school.
                                                                                    
           However, that doesn’t preclude the possibility of the child’s saying, “No, I
           don’t want to come back here.”                                           
               Again, this is an invitation to explore the child’s concerns and to find
                                                                                    
           out what might make her feel more comfortable next time. Perhaps she     
           wants more toys to play with here or to bring a friend next time. And    
                                                                                    
           perhaps you could use more toys in your office, or it might eventually be
           useful to see this child’s friend. However, you may be tempted with      
           children to want to make them happy quickly, rather than giving yourself 
                                                                                    
           time to think about what the child is trying to communicate to you about 
           herself: for example, a wish that you would give her things that her parents
           do not, or to be your favorite client, or to have things from you that she
                                                                                    
           thinks are forbidden at home.                                            
               Whatever the meaning of the communication turns out to be, the point 
                                                                                    
           is that you must be cautious about making promises to children. And the  
           one that most frequently trips therapists up is, “If I tell you something, will
           you promise me you won’t tell anyone?”                                   
                                                                                    
               The question of what constitutes an appropriate level of confidentiality
           with a child can seem to be an extremely complicated one, and you must   
                                                                                    
           clarify it with your supervisor before you see a child, since it can easily
           come up in a first interview. For example, a parent who is unfamiliar with
           how therapy works might ask you to report what a child said to you while 
                                                                                    
           the two of you were alone. Or the parent might want to know-if you are   
           going to continue to see the child-how you plan to share information after
           the sessions. Or the child might ask you to promise that you won’t tell  
                                                                                    
           anyone what she is about to tell you, and then proceed to report that    
           someone is hitting her with an extension cord, or selling crack, or engaging
                                                                                    
           in sexual activities with her, or that the child took a knife to herself last
           week.                                                                    
               These examples may sound extreme-they may even make you so           
                                                                                    
           anxious that you vow you will never see a child alone but regrettably they
           do happen from time to time, and you must do everything necessary to

=== Page 85 (1 cols) ===
protect the child, and yourself, and to meet your legal obligations as well.
           These issues will be taken up in more detail in Chapters Nine and Eleven,
           but for now a few basic guidelines may be helpful.                       
                                                                                    
               First, let us consider the question of how you preserve the child’s  
           confidentiality vis-à-vis her parents and still maintain a therapeutic alliance
                                                                                    
           with them. Your supervisor may have some wording she prefers, but in     
           general you can offer the parents two things: first, that you will share with
           them themes and concerns that seem important in their child’s behavior and
                                                                                    
           feelings, without actually repeating what she says; and second, that you will
           certainly let them know immediately if you have any indication that the  
                                                                                    
           child is in any way endangered, either by herself or anyone else.        
               These guidelines should be presented to parents in a way that indicates
           that this is what is most helpful to a child. Stating them is usually sufficient
                                                                                    
           to reassure them that you are not interested in excluding them; that you 
           understand and respect the fact that they are concerned about their child;
           that they have a right to know; and that you appreciate the fact that they
                                                                                    
           have the ultimate responsibility for their child’s well-being.           
               From the child’s point of view, the question of what you are going to
                                                                                    
           tell other people may come up very early; for example, she may ask you to
           promise not to tell something. Again, you need to verify with your       
           supervisor her preference for handling such situations. However, if no   
                                                                                    
           guidelines are available, it is generally best to explain to a child that what
           you and she talk about is for the most part between the two of you, but that
                                                                                    
           there is one major exception: If she tells you that she is being hurt by 
           someone else, or might hurt herself, or-in rare cases-might hurt someone 
           else.                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Therapists are often concerned that spelling this out for a child may
           keep the child from confiding in you if she is in danger. In fact, the effect is
           often the opposite, since you are letting the child know that you intend to
                                                                                    
           protect her from being hurt or from being so out of control that she might
           hurt someone else. Furthermore, as you will discover in Chapters Eight,  
                                                                                    
           Nine, and Eleven, there may be circumstances under which you do not have 
           a choice as to whether you notify the authorities or the child’s parents, so
           telling the child in advance will help shield you from the painful dilemma
                                                                                    
           of feeling that you have betrayed a child’s confidence.

=== Page 86 (1 cols) ===
When you have completed the interview with the child, invite the     
           parents back in to talk with you briefly about meeting again and to raise any
           questions they may have. Very often, although adults coming for therapy  
                                                                                    
           might not ask such a question about themselves, the parents will want you
           to tell them right then what you think is troubling their child and how long
                                                                                    
           it will take to make it go away. These questions are certainly understandable
           in light of the anxiety most parents feel about bringing their child for help,
           and you will need to explain the assessment process and perhaps let the  
                                                                                    
           parents know that you may not even know for a while if yours is the right
           setting for their child.                                                 
                                                                                    
               After that, what remains is to explicate, if you have not already done
           so, the role the parents will play in helping the child. Some hold the   
           position that a child’s therapy should be free of any parental involvement.
                                                                                    
           Other agencies believe you cannot treat a child without the active       
           participation of the parents or caretakers, and perhaps of the extended  
           family as well. Some settings by definition demand that the parents must 
                                                                                    
           participate; others prohibit them from contributing.                     
               Clarify this with the parents; then offer a next appointment for the 
                                                                                    
           child and/or the parents depending on what seems indicated. For instance,
           you may next need to take a developmental history on the child-which you 
           and a parent, or both parents, would do without the child present. Or you
                                                                                    
           may want the next meeting to be a full session with just the child.      
               Explain to the parents the importance of consistency in keeping      
                                                                                    
           appointments, especially for a child in treatment. Then let the child know
           when and for how long you will be meeting each time, and answer any      
           questions she may have. Lastly, escort them all back to the waiting room.
                                                                                    
               Then, as always, leave yourself a few minutes to think about, and    
           make notes of, your observations.                                        
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 87 (1 cols) ===
six                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                          H                                                         
                              OW     TO     TAKE       A                            
                                                                                    
                DEVELOPMENTAL                      HISTORY                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           N                                                                        
              o doubt the first question that comes to mind in approaching this chapter
                                                                                    
           is: What exactly is a developmental history, anyway? If you are accustomed
           to seeing mostly adult clients, you may even have wished for something   
                                                                                    
           like a developmental history on many occasions, but not known what it was
           called.                                                                  
               When you see an adult, you are often trying to imagine what his early
                                                                                    
           environment-uncolored by the effects of time or loss or fear or illness or
           growth or hurt-was actually like. Perhaps you have even wondered from    
                                                                                    
           time to time what it would be like to interview others who knew the client
           as a child: to hear their memories and impressions of his innate         
           temperament, or his reactions to stress, or the character of his early   
                                                                                    
           attachments, or his role in the family. But for the most part such       
           opportunities do not exist in treating adults and would not necessarily be
                                                                                    
           helpful to the therapy even if they did.                                 
               This is not true for children, however. The opportunity to interview 
           one or both primary caretakers about the child’s earliest environment and
                                                                                    
           experience is invaluable in making a thorough and conscientious          
           assessment. It allows the therapist not only to acquire relatively accurate
           historical data about the child’s life, but also-just as importantly-to gain
                                                                                    
           significant access to the parents’ feelings about the child in a way that is not
           going to endanger the therapeutic alliance between parent(s) and therapist.
                                                                                    
               Perhaps you are wondering how that can happen. How can you learn     
           about the character of the fundamental parent-child relationship at such an
           early stage in the therapy without the parents’ feeling that you are intruding
                                                                                    
           or judging their performance as parents? The answer is the same as it is for
           any other good assessment tool: that the process of conducting a

=== Page 88 (1 cols) ===
developmental history consists of a who-what-when-where-how series of    
           questions. It is precisely the benign, near-plodding quality of the history-
           taking process that will reassure parents that you are neither going to ask
                                                                                    
           that they reveal too much about themselves nor are you interested in placing
           blame. You simply need some facts: the who-what-when-where-how. From     
                                                                                    
           those facts, and all the other information you acquire along the way, the
           why-or whys-will eventually emerge.                                      
               Therefore, you should introduce the concept of taking a developmental
                                                                                    
           history as soon as possible-preferably at the end of the first interview. If a
           parent has a question as to whether or not this is a necessary step in helping
                                                                                    
           the child, you should explain that this is something you routinely do with
           every parent who brings a child for therapy. You should also make it clear
           that it may take as long as two sessions to complete the developmental   
                                                                                    
           history, and that it is best done when the parent can come to see you without
           any children present.                                                    
               The parent referred to above is usually the mother, because this chapter
                                                                                    
           assumes that the person who can be most informative in the developmental 
           history-taking is a child’s mother. However, the questions can be easily 
                                                                                    
           adapted if your supervisor or your agency feels that mother and father   
           should be seen together for these interviews or that mother should do one
           and father the next.                                                     
                                                                                    
               There are also other circumstances in which mother would not be the  
           first or even a possible choice. For example, some children’s mothers have
                                                                                    
           not had contact with them since they were born, or they are unable-for   
           physical or mental reasons-to be adequate reporters, or they are prohibited
           by law from being involved in their children’s therapy. Obviously, in these
                                                                                    
           situations you will rely on whoever has the early knowledge of the child, or
           observed the mother and child together, or can make records available to 
           you. That may be the father, or a grandparent, or a foster mother, or a  
                                                                                    
           hospital, or the social worker in a social welfare agency.               
               Your first choice, however, remains the mother. You must bear in mind
                                                                                    
           that mothers of small children have far more difficulty scheduling time to
           do things alone than clients without children, so you will have to be as 
           flexible as possible and not necessarily expect her to be able to schedule
                                                                                    
           two interviews right then. Since it is not necessary for the developmental
           history to be completed before you start seeing the child or the family for

=== Page 89 (1 cols) ===
therapy, working around the mother’s schedule should not present a major 
           obstacle to getting help for the child.                                  
               Assuming that you have arranged to see the parent alone, what is it  
                                                                                    
           that you want to know, and why? Basically, most of the information you are
           seeking in the developmental history focuses on the period from just before
                                                                                    
           the child’s birth to approximately the age of five, although a few questions
           will be relevant to older children as well.                              
               The reasons to focus so intently on the early period are twofold. First
                                                                                    
           is that the impact of the primary environment and caretakers is likely to be
           virtually undiluted during this period and, although a child may garner  
                                                                                    
           strength from that environment at any time in his development, it is unlikely
           that he will ever be as vulnerable to the weaknesses of that environment or
           those caretakers as in the first five years.                             
                                                                                    
               Second is that by the time you see the child for a particular problem at
           the age of six or seven or eight, he may be reacting to a complex mix of 
           recent events, constitutional factors, environmental changes, or any of a
                                                                                    
           number of other combinations-in other words, a blurred superimposition of
           the here-and-now on the way-back-when. The developmental history allows  
                                                                                    
           you a view of the child’s functioning over time. And that, in turn, will help
           you to assess whether what you are observing now is a temporary setback in
           an otherwise steady movement toward maturity or the inevitable outcome   
                                                                                    
           of an earlier series of emotional or physical or temperamental mishaps   
           which must be addressed before the child can move forward in his progress.
                                                                                    
               When you begin the developmental history you should have an outline  
           such as the one at the end of this chapter available to you. However, you
           should remember that it is intended as guidelines for a conversation, not as
                                                                                    
           a series of questions that must be answered entirely and in order. In fact,
           much of your sense of the relationship between mother and child may      
           actually come from the digressions, so-time permitting-you should let them
                                                                                    
           happen.                                                                  
               A mother will often express concern, especially if she has had a     
                                                                                    
           number of children, that she may not remember all the details of this    
           particular child’s early history. You can reassure her that, even though 
           things seem a bit blurry at the beginning of this process, most mothers  
                                                                                    
           remember anything unusual about a particular child’s history, so she can 
           relax and just do her best.

=== Page 90 (1 cols) ===
As with the information you acquire in any interview, you and your   
           supervisor are going to think about and interpret the information in a   
           developmental history many times over, based on increasing knowledge of  
                                                                                    
           the strengths and weaknesses and adaptations and innate characteristics of
           parents and child. Therefore, the remainder of this chapter will focus on the
                                                                                    
           general purposes of the developmental history and a framework for        
           focusing your thinking and attention.                                    
               As you can see from the developmental history outlined at the end of 
                                                                                    
           this chapter, you begin your exploration of this child’s development with
           the physical and psychological climate in which the mother found herself 
                                                                                    
           when this child was conceived. Beginning with the mother’s age when she  
           became pregnant, you obtain your first indication of the level of biological
           risk to this infant at birth. Was the mother 14, or 40, or within three to four
                                                                                    
           years in either direction? If so, you are alerted to far ends of a spectrum
           where a child might be born with a greater likelihood of being physically
           compromised in some way, whether apparent or not. You have also          
                                                                                    
           commenced one of the tracks you are going to follow throughout the       
           developmental history. That is, the building up of a profile of this child’s
                                                                                    
           physical state over his lifetime to date - as seen through the eyes of his
           primary caretaker.                                                       
               The idea of acquiring data about the child’s physical wellbeing in this
                                                                                    
           way may seem redundant, since we have already explored the value of a    
           medical history and getting a report from any client’s physician-especially a
                                                                                    
           child’s. However, the crucial aspect of exploring the child’s health via the
           developmental history is not only to get facts but also to get feelings about
           those facts from the person whose feelings mean the most to a child.     
                                                                                    
           Throughout the various areas of the history-taking, this is a significant
           aspect to which you will be attending.                                   
               Along with the collection of data, you will be acquiring a sense of who
                                                                                    
           this woman was before she became a mother. What were her experiences of  
           relationships? How did she see herself before and during her pregnancy?  
                                                                                    
           How did she respond to the reality of being pregnant and to the child’s birth
           and to the innate endowment with which this child was born? What was the 
           social and cultural environment which surrounded her and her newborn     
                                                                                    
           baby? What impact did her physical and psychological state have on the

=== Page 91 (1 cols) ===
child? And what impact did the child have on her physical and            
           psychological state?                                                     
               As you look over the questions at the end of the chapter you will see a
                                                                                    
           steady progression of questions focused on the physical well-being first of
           the mother, then of the mother and child, and then of the child. Also in that
                                                                                    
           first series of questions are hints of the depth of the attachments in this
           child’s orbit. First you will explore the sense of connection between the two
           people who produced this child. Answers to the questions of how long they
                                                                                    
           had known each other or whether the pregnancy was planned or unplanned   
           are going to give you your first inkling of what these two people meant to
                                                                                    
           each other and what a child produced from that union might represent. For
           example, a child born to a woman who had been trying unsuccessfully for  
           many years of marriage to produce a child could result in a very different
                                                                                    
           initial sense of attachment than a child borne of a casual liaison or a sexual
           assault.                                                                 
               However, one must as always proceed with caution in making           
                                                                                    
           assumptions, such as assuming that because a child was unplanned he was  
           unwanted; or that a parent has been so wounded by the realities of life that
                                                                                    
           she could not cherish her child; or that a parent who expresses anger or 
           resentment toward a child does not still wish to be a good parent.       
               For these reasons and many others, you will explore the mother’s     
                                                                                    
           awareness of her own psychological state during her pregnancy and the    
           infant’s earliest days, both directly by asking about it and indirectly by
                                                                                    
           inquiring about such things as the baby’s sleeping habits, which will often
           have a direct effect on mother’s ability to feel rested and at ease.     
               Or perhaps you will get some sense from a response to the question   
                                                                                    
           about babysitters that this was a mother who found it difficult to tolerate
           being with her baby for long periods of time. Or the question about      
           hospitalizations of the parent during this period in the child’s life may lead
                                                                                    
           to a discussion of a postpartum depression.                              
               At the same time as you are developing an impression of the mother’s 
                                                                                    
           psychological condition, you will also be getting information about this 
           child’s innate temperament. Even a simple question about the baby’s      
           sucking pattern at birth will give a clue to this particular infant’s degree of
                                                                                    
           physical intensity. Responses to such questions as whether or not the baby
           was cuddly or walked at a very early age may suggest that this was a child

=== Page 92 (1 cols) ===
born with an active, restless disposition or one whose basic biological  
           nature was more placid. This sort of information will help frame questions
           for you about the current problem for which this child is being brought to
                                                                                    
           you and what part his inborn characteristics might be playing in that    
           problem.                                                                 
                                                                                    
               As the history progresses, you will introduce a series of questions  
           addressing standard developmental milestones. These are intended to      
           explore whether the child accomplished certain physical tasks within a   
                                                                                    
           period that is considered normal. It is important to note, however, that this
           is a range of time. If the child did not sit or walk or talk during that time
                                                                                    
           frame, it should certainly be explored and can be extremely important in 
           assessing whether this baby was compromised in some way. However, the    
           developmental lag, as reported by the parent, is not necessarily diagnostic in
                                                                                    
           and of itself.                                                           
               For example, you may hear that this baby “took forever to say a word”
           or was “a scrawny little thing.” If what the mother is expressing sounds 
                                                                                    
           intense or extreme, it is often useful to try and get some corroborating data.
           For example, you can ask the mother if she can remember discussing with  
                                                                                    
           the baby’s pediatrician any concerns she had at the time about the baby’s
           lack of verbal development or his slow growth. If such a conversation did
           take place, perhaps she can remember what the doctor said. This line of  
                                                                                    
           inquiry will help you differentiate, as best you can, this child’s actual
           characteristics as an infant from this mother’s expectations.            
                                                                                    
               Most parents-regardless of whether their baby was born to them or    
           adopted-form some mental image and some preconceived feelings about the  
           baby, often long before he is born. These may be a dream that he will be a
                                                                                    
           carpenter like his grandfather or a hope that he will be a girl, or tall, or the
           smartest child in his class.                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                  REMEMBER                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Taking a developmental history is not just asking questions. It     
                is listening for the parent’s feelings of attachment and

=== Page 93 (1 cols) ===
expectation about the child and clues to the child’s innate         
                temperament  and developmental progress.                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Or the wishes may be subtler: that he will be loving to his mother like
                                                                                    
           her brother who drowned when she was ten; or that he will make his father
           feel more manly because he can play baseball with his son. Sometimes,    
           sadly, an expectant mother may wish for nothing more than not to be      
                                                                                    
           burdened with the child of that father; or that this baby will be so     
           independent that mother-or father-can return to earning a living without 
                                                                                    
           feeling that the baby is being deprived; or some whole other set of thoughts
           and feelings about which you could not possibly be aware. You should train
           yourself to become alert to these expectations, because the discrepancy  
                                                                                    
           between the parents’ expectations and the child’s inherent character or  
           capabilities may, in fact, be the reason they are in your office.        
                                                                                    
               So as you progress through the developmental history you will begin  
           to understand-one small anecdote at a time-how each of these elements-the
           physical, the psychological, the interpersonal, the innate disposition of
                                                                                    
           parent and child, the level of developmental growth, and the parents’    
           expectations-are interwoven to form the unique character of the relationship
           between these particular parents and this particular child. And with that will
                                                                                    
           come some emerging sense of the bonds between them, and whether those    
           bonds are strong enough to support the child through the crucial emotional,
                                                                                    
           physical, and developmental tasks he must now achieve in order to move to
           the next level of experience and growth.                                 
                                                                                    
           T                                                                        
            HE                                                                      
               D                                                                    
                EVELOPMENTAL                                                        
                              H                                                     
                               ISTORY                                               
           Keep in mind that you will need to adapt these questions based on whom   
           you are interviewing, as well as to cultural differences and to the economic
           and social conditions in the parent’s life.                              
           1. How old were you when you met your child’s father?                    
           2. How old was he?                                                       
           3. How did you meet?                                                     
           4. How soon after you met did you become pregnant?                       
           5. Was the pregnancy planned?

=== Page 94 (1 cols) ===
6. Before that, had you ever had a problem getting pregnant?             
           7. Had you ever had a miscarriage or an abortion?                        
           8. What was the child’s father’s reaction to your getting pregnant?      
                                                                                    
           9. What was your family’s reaction?                                      
           10. What was the father’s family’s reaction?                             
                                                                                    
           11. What was your reaction?                                              
           12. How did you feel physically during the pregnancy? Did you have       
               regular checkups? Where there any complications?                     
                                                                                    
           13. How did you feel emotionally during the pregnancy?                   
           14. Was it a full-term pregnancy?                                        
                                                                                    
           15. Did you take any medications during the pregnancy?                   
           16. Who went with you to the hospital when the baby was born?            
           17. How long were you in labor?                                          
                                                                                    
           18. Were you given any medications during labor or delivery?             
           19. Were there any complications during delivery?                        
           20. How much did the baby weigh?                                         
                                                                                    
           21. How long did you stay in the hospital?                               
           22. Did you and the baby leave together?                                 
                                                                                    
           23. When you left the hospital, with whom did you go to live?            
           24. In the first few weeks, who helped you with the baby?                
           25. Who made the decision about the child’s name? Who was the child      
                                                                                    
               named after?                                                         
           26. Who does the child look like?                                        
                                                                                    
           27. Did you breast feed or bottle feed? For how long? How was the baby   
               weaned?                                                              
           28. Did the baby have a strong sucking instinct?                         
                                                                                    
           29. Was the baby a good eater? Is this still true?                       
           30. What were the baby’s early sleeping habits?                          
           31. Was the baby “cuddly”?                                               
                                                                                    
           32. Do you think that your child began to sit, stand, walk, or talk unusually
               late or early? Did anyone else ever tell you that about your child?  
                                                                                    
           33. When was your child toilet-trained?                                  
           34. How was your child toilet-trained? By whom?                          
           35. Did you work during your pregnancy?                                  
                                                                                    
           36. Did you go to work after the baby was born?                          
           37. Who took care of the baby when you had to leave for any reason?

=== Page 95 (1 cols) ===
38. Has your child ever been ill? At what age? For how long?             
           39. Has your child had any serious accidents?                            
           40. Has your child ever been hospitalized? For how long?                 
                                                                                    
           41. Since your child was born, have you ever been hospitalized? Why? For 
               how long? Who took care of the child?                                
                                                                                    
           42. Does your child have younger brothers or sisters? What was your      
               child’s reaction to their birth?                                     
           43. Has your child ever asked any questions about sex? What? How did you 
                                                                                    
               answer?                                                              
           44. Have you ever been aware of your child masturbating? What did you    
                                                                                    
               tell the child?                                                      
           45. What was the earliest grade your child attended in school, including 
               nursery school? How old was your child?                              
                                                                                    
           46. Did your child ever have any difficulty separating from you to go to 
               school?                                                              
           47. Has your child had any learning problems in school?                  
                                                                                    
           48. Has your child had any behavior problems at school? Or at home?      
           49. Who disciplines your child, and how?                                 
                                                                                    
           50. Does your child have friends?                                        
           51. Has your child ever slept away from home?                            
           52. At home, does your child share a bedroom? With whom?                 
                                                                                    
           53. Who is the child close to in the immediate and in the extended family?
           54. Has anyone who was important to the child died? Under what           
                                                                                    
               circumstances?                                                       
           55. Has the child been separated from anyone who was important, either by
               that person moving or by you and the child moving?                   
                                                                                    
           56. Were you and the child’s father married? If so, are you now divorced or
               separated?                                                           
           57. When did the child last see his father? Under what circumstances?    
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 96 (1 cols) ===
seven                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
             H                                                                      
                OW      TO                                                          
                              C                                                     
                                 ONDUCT            THE                              
                                                            F                       
                                                              IRST                  
               I                                                                    
                NTERVIEW              WITH        A                                 
                                                      C                             
                                                         OUPLE                      
           T                                                                        
             here may be many occasions-especially if you treat children and families
           - when you will have two people in your office whom you consider a       
           couple. They are not, however, necessarily seeking, or even suitable for,
           couples therapy. This chapter will be devoted to defining “a couple” for the
           purposes of therapy, to introducing some basic concepts of couples       
           treatment, and to exploring how to conduct the first interview when you and
           your supervisor have concluded that seeing the couple together is indicated.
           Let us begin with two basic ideas.                                       
                                                                                    
               First, the concept of a couple to be used in this chapter is as follows:
           any two people who have, or have had, or wish to have an abiding, intimate
           relationship. Those two people may or may not be married. They may or    
                                                                                    
           may not be a male and a female. They may or may not have, or have had, or
           wish to have a sexual relationship. They may or may not be of the same   
                                                                                    
           race or religion or social strata-or even of the same generation.        
               In other words, even though the impact of family or societal attitudes
           on their choice of a partner may eventually turn out to be a significant issue
                                                                                    
           in the treatment of these two individuals, your initial interest, as a therapist,
           is in whether or not the two people who appear before you do, or ever did,
           consider themselves “a couple.”                                          
                                                                                    
               Second, “a couple” may or may not have come to see you originally    
           for couples therapy. They may have come to you for treatment of their    
                                                                                    
           child, or for individual treatment, or for some other purpose entirely. In
           other words, they may not have initiated treatment with the idea of being
           seen together or because they necessarily understood that their feelings or
                                                                                    
           behavior were affecting their relationship with a partner or that their  
           relationship with a partner was affecting their feelings or behavior. Those

=== Page 97 (1 cols) ===
realizations may have evolved in the course of some other kind of treatment
           with you or some other therapist.                                        
               On the other hand, of course, the two people you find before you may 
                                                                                    
           have sought you out precisely because one or both felt strongly that     
           something in the interactions between the two of them was causing        
                                                                                    
           unhappiness. It is frequently the case with couples that one of the partners is
           experiencing this unhappiness much more keenly than the other.           
           Consequently, you are going to begin your thinking about this couple-    
                                                                                    
           possibly as early as the initial phone contact with one of them-by asking
           yourself whether you have two “voluntary” clients asking for help or     
                                                                                    
           whether one of the partners may be feeling as if she is being forced into
           therapy by a wish to keep her partner “happy” or by an implicit threat that
           she will lose her partner if she does not come to see you. This difference in
                                                                                    
           feelings about the need for couples therapy is not a contraindication, but it
           is something you should think about so that you do not presume-especially
           in the first interview-that both partners are willing participants.      
                                                                                    
               Another tempting presumption to avoid is the notion that the couple is
           seeking your help in order to continue the relationship. Even though that
                                                                                    
           may appear to be their intention-or at least the intention of the partner who
           calls-it may turn out that these two people are actually coming to you at a
           point where one or both sense-or one of them has already decided-that the
                                                                                    
           day-to-day relationship is ending or must end. Your help is actually needed
           in order for them to find a graceful, fair, or comfortable way to make this
                                                                                    
           ending.                                                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                  REMEMBER                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Do not assume that both partners wish to stay together.             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               It can be quite difficult for a therapist to avoid becoming invested in
           seeing a couple stay together, particularly if the partners are elderly, or there
           are children involved, or one partner will suffer severe economic hardship if

=== Page 98 (1 cols) ===
the other partner leaves. However, it is especially important at such times to
           remember that one cannot be of help if one cannot “start where the clients
           are.” If the idea that you may ultimately be a compassionate overseer of a
                                                                                    
           relationship’s demise is not one you feel comfortable with, then perhaps 
           you should decline the case.                                             
                                                                                    
               These are all issues that will require some thought before you see the
           couple. If you have the information available to you after the initial phone
           contact, you might also want to start thinking about the life stage that each
                                                                                    
           of the partners is likely to be in, as well as the probable stage of the 
           relationship. For example, you receive an application from a married couple
                                                                                    
           seeking therapy. The wife is 32 years old and from the application you can
           see that she has three children: a 14-year-old girl and a ten-year-old boy by
           a previous relationship, and a six-month-old baby by her present husband,
                                                                                    
           who is 26 years old.                                                     
               Even with this minimum amount of information, one might consider     
           that this is a woman whose late adolescence and early adulthood-a time she
                                                                                    
           may have seen others devoting to “sowing their wild oats”-were spent     
           taking care of two babies, with or without a partner to help share in the
                                                                                    
           responsibilities. On the other hand, her new husband appears to have had 
           almost eight more years than she to complete the emotional tasks of      
           growingup before he had a child himself.                                 
                                                                                    
               These differences in opportunity to complete stages in their personal
           development may have important ramifications in their relationship and   
                                                                                    
           their expectations for one another. For instance, the wife in this example
           might see marrying a younger man as a way to recapture some time she felt
           was lost by having babies at such a young age, while he might have chosen
                                                                                    
           her because he saw her as more experienced and stable-a woman who        
           would help him “settle down” if he was having difficulty doing so on his 
           own.                                                                     
                                                                                    
               Such divergent styles of addressing issues of personal growth are not
           at all unusual and may be perfectly appropriate to the stage in which the
                                                                                    
           individual partners find themselves. However, they have the potential to 
           cause considerable strain in the relationship if the expectations that   
           accompany them are at great variance with each other. In any case,       
                                                                                    
           however, they certainly require attention and evaluation on your part if you
           are going to be helpful to the couple.

=== Page 99 (1 cols) ===
You must also give some thought to the stage of the relationship itself.
           Using this same couple as an example: They are probably relatively       
           recently married and are certainly new parents. However, if they are indeed
                                                                                    
           newlyweds, they are newlyweds who found themselves with two children     
           on the day they got married, perhaps interfering for both of them with the
                                                                                    
           opportunity to be alone, to get to know each other as a married couple, and
           to work out some of the stresses that inevitably follow on the heels of any
           momentous life decision. Further, perhaps not long after they were married,
                                                                                    
           they had a baby, which for one of them was an entirely new experience. He
           was catapulted, for the first time, into parenthood, while his wife had  
                                                                                    
           experienced this twice before.                                           
               Here, too, it is not hard to imagine ways in which such a move to a  
           different phase of the relationship could be disruptive. With this same  
                                                                                    
           couple, for example, the wife may have hoped-after such a long period of 
           being solely responsible for a family-to have a time of feeling taken care of
           herself before resuming the role of nurturer; meanwhile, the husband may 
                                                                                    
           have married when he did-and perhaps whom he did-not only because he     
           wanted a wife but also because he wanted a child. In part, he may have   
                                                                                    
           chosen this particular woman because she had already demonstrated her    
           capacity to be a good mother.                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                               ASK    YOURSELF                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                What life stage is each of the partners in?                         
                What life stage is the relationship in?                             
                How  does this couple manage the issues of inclusion, control,      
                                                                                    
                and affection?                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Again, these are not necessarily conditions that insure that a       
           relationship will suffer, and you should not presume that you understand,
                                                                                    
           before you even see two people, more than they do about what has been    
           helpful or harmful in the choices they have made. But you should be alert

=== Page 100 (1 cols) ===
to, and think ahead about, what such circumstances might do to the hopes 
           and expectations each had for herself and her partner when they entered  
           into the marriage. In so doing you begin preparing yourself to answer the
                                                                                    
           question that should always be in your mind as you ready yourself for a first
           interview of any kind: that is, why now?                                 
                                                                                    
               Having thought about all that, when the couple actually arrives in your
           office you will harken back to many of the principles you used for       
           commencing a family interview. There will be introductions, some brief   
                                                                                    
           casual conversation, some mental notes to yourself about where the partners
           seat themselves, any noticeable physical characteristics, unusual speech or
                                                                                    
           thought patterns, etc. And you will remind yourself about the importance of
           joining with both partners in identifying their concerns. After these    
           amenities and observations, you begin the actual interview by asking each
                                                                                    
           of them what he or she thinks the problem is between them.               
               The answers to this question are of obvious use to you as the therapist,
           and you should write them down and briefly explore their meaning to the  
                                                                                    
           partner who is describing her impressions. However, there are other      
           important reasons to start the interview with this question. One is that this
                                                                                    
           may be the first time each of the partners has actually articulated a    
           perspective on what the difficulty is that the two of them are having. Later
           on you will want to ask both partners whether or not they were aware that
                                                                                    
           this is how their mate saw the issues between them. Very often, the answer
           is no. One partner frequently will express surprise and, under the best of
                                                                                    
           circumstances, some interest in or curiosity about the description of the
           problem.                                                                 
               The other reason to start with this question is to discover whether or
                                                                                    
           not these two people can tolerate listening to each other’s point of view at
           all, and if not, what they do to avoid it. There are many different ways in
           which one partner can communicate to the other-or to you-that she        
                                                                                    
           disagrees with, or does not believe, or simply has no interest in hearing
           what her partner is saying. These communications can be quiet and subtle:
                                                                                    
           for example, turning away, or becoming sullen or withdrawn, or simply not
           responding, or, when it is her turn to speak, just moving on as if her partner
           had said nothing. Or, they can be vocal and obvious. For example, one    
                                                                                    
           partner may interrupt the other, or talk over her, or talk louder, or talk
           directly to you while the other partner is responding to your question. Or

=== Page 101 (1 cols) ===
one partner may begin to make nonverbal “comments” to distract you from  
           what the other is saying or small asides intended to devalue the content of
           her partner’s grievances. Or the two of them may simply start to argue as if
                                                                                    
           you weren’t in the room. Or, regrettably, one partner may menace the other
           physically or verbally in order to stop the discussion.                  
                                                                                    
               Assessing the seriousness of a threat of physical harm will be       
           discussed in detail in the next chapter. Let us first address the more benign-
           but often equally unproductive-ways in which couples sometimes interact. 
                                                                                    
           A therapist doing couples work, especially for the first time, can find it
           particularly difficult to feel that she can be helpful to two people when they
                                                                                    
           can’t even tolerate differences of opinion about the nature of the problem.
           And when they start off by raising their voices or being verbally abusive to
           each other, it is particularly hard to think of a useful way to intervene.
                                                                                    
               So, how are you to think of this behavior in a way that will allow you
           to make good use of it? Well, perhaps the most constructive way to       
           conceptualize what you are witnessing is to think of it as a home movie. 
                                                                                    
           These two people are allowing you to see for yourself-and assess for     
           yourself-how they interact with each other right now. You are not hearing a
                                                                                    
           polite, cautiously edited report of a disagreement that occurred yesterday, or
           last week, or five years ago; you are watching the relationship as it is at this
           moment in time. And the more uncensored the interactions are, the more of
                                                                                    
           a feel you are going to have of how each of them handles conflict and of 
           what they need from you.                                                 
                                                                                    
               So you should let them argue for a few minutes. Then you should stop 
           them. Ask them if this is how most of their disagreements go. The answer is
           likely to be yes. If that is the case, then you should thank them for letting
                                                                                    
           you see what isn’t working. You should tell them that this has been very 
           helpful to you, but that it is probably not very helpful to them. The three of
           you need to establish some understanding about, and guidelines for, talking
                                                                                    
           that will make it possible for each to express an opinion in a way that  
           insures that he or she can speak without interruption and at least allows for
                                                                                    
           the possibility that the partner will listen and eventually respond.     
               However, before we go on to setting these guidelines, it is important to
           emphasize that disagreements-or even arguments-are not necessarily       
                                                                                    
           something to be discouraged in treating a couple. In fact, as you make your
           assessment of a particular couple’s interactions, you may notice that they

=== Page 102 (1 cols) ===
never really express any disagreement and that one-or both-are quick to  
           draw back if they happen to approach any genuine source of conflict.     
               Therefore, it is extremely important for you to make a distinction   
                                                                                    
           between constructive and destructive arguing. You must assess whether the
           way in which this couple agrees-or disagrees-produces useful changes in  
                                                                                    
           their relationship and leads to growth and a better understanding between
           the two of them, or whether they are on “spin cycle”-just going around and
           around on the same issues rather than moving on to a new level of        
                                                                                    
           mutuality.                                                               
               One of the reasons this aspect of the assessment can be so difficult for
                                                                                    
           the therapist is that you yourself may find rageful silences or cursing or
           yelling extremely unpleasant and discomfiting. Or your own cultural      
           background may be one in which disagreements are to be mollified or      
                                                                                    
           subdued as quickly as possible.                                          
               With such feelings and experiences in your own life, it is hard to think
           that these two people might actually find such behavior quite familiar and
                                                                                    
           comfortable and in no way a deterrent to a useful resolution of their    
           differences. If so, it is you who may have to adjust - at least for a while - to
                                                                                    
           a higher decibel level than you are accustomed to, or sulking silences, or
           some linguistic indelicacies.                                            
               However, if the major purpose of one or both partners’               
                                                                                    
           communications is to try and make the other person feel to blame for all the
           problems in the relationship, then you should gently introduce the notion
                                                                                    
           that, by definition, in a relationship both partners bear an equal       
           responsibility for the conflicts they are having. Suggest that they do   
           something as pragmatic as trying to start their sentences with “I” rather than
                                                                                    
           “you” for a while, that they try to focus on what they are each feeling rather
           than on what their partner is doing.                                     
               But if the problem in the interaction is the threat of physical violence
                                                                                    
           by one partner against the other, then a rapid intervention is called for.
           Again, this can be extremely disconcerting to you as the therapist,      
                                                                                    
           especially if you have any sense that some of that threatening behavior  
           could eventually be aimed at you. This subject is discussed at length in the
           next chapter, along with guidelines for managing your anxieties. Let us  
                                                                                    
           focus here on threats by one partner against the other.

=== Page 103 (1 cols) ===
It is extremely difficult at such times not to identify with the threatened
           partner and not to rapidly lapse into moral rhetoric about individual rights
           and respecting the sovereignty of others, etc. And all of those comments 
                                                                                    
           may be entirely correct and decent. However, they are frequently ineffective
           in stopping the behavior. Why? Because they can easily give the impression
                                                                                    
           that you have just “taken sides” or become frightened yourself, either of
           which would probably preclude the aggressive partner’s seeing you any    
           longer as a fair and impartial and effective listener.                   
                                                                                    
               What is probably more useful is to explain that there is really no way
           in which you can be useful as a therapist-or proceed with the interview-if
                                                                                    
           someone is in danger of being hurt. Then you can inquire whether the     
           threatening partner feels she can control her behavior so the session can
           continue, or whether she would prefer to step outside for a few minutes, or
                                                                                    
           whether she would rather come back next week when she is feeling calmer. 
               Depending on her response, you can make a simple contract about      
           other ways she can signal that she is losing patience with her partner. Then
                                                                                    
           you can proceed with the interview. However, whether or not-or how-one   
           conducts therapy with a couple where there has been or might be assaultive
                                                                                    
           behavior is a complicated and frequently controversial question. You will
           certainly want to explore the agency’s policies about such behavior as well
           as discuss with your supervisor, before the next session, how to address 
                                                                                    
           threats of, or actual physical aggression by one or both of the partners 
           which may be happening when they are not in your office.                 
                                                                                    
               So, let us assume that the interview is going to continue with a     
           contentious couple or a pair who talk “at” each other. The first guideline to
           establish is that for now they will each talk to you during the session rather
                                                                                    
           than trying to talk to each other, and that each partner will agree to let the
           other finish a thought so that you can get some of the basic information you
           need in order to better understand their differences. This agreement will
                                                                                    
           allow you to ask questions and get answers without either of them feeling
           quite so defensive, and should facilitate a freer flow of conversation.  
                                                                                    
               In addition, when such guidelines are introduced-in any initial      
           interview in which structure-setting is needed-it also serves another    
           extremely important purpose: It suggests that you might know some things 
                                                                                    
           that can be helpful to these partners in changing their behavior.

=== Page 104 (1 cols) ===
This is not to say that you know everything, and that if they simply sit
           back you will be magically able to fix their problem. What it can do,    
           though, is to introduce some optimism into the process, because when two 
                                                                                    
           people have been struggling for a long time with the same failed         
           communications it is terribly hard to sustain any hope that things might 
                                                                                    
           change for the better. And without hope, the effort of therapy will seem 
           enormous.                                                                
               Even when you do not need limit-setting in order to do so, you can   
                                                                                    
           remind a couple of better times by proceeding to the next stage of the   
           interview, in which you get some brief history of the relationship.      
                                                                                    
           Especially when you are used to seeing only individual clients, it can take
           some practice to accustom yourself to the idea that in seeing two people as
           a couple the purpose, especially in the first interview, is to find out about
                                                                                    
           these two people as they are related to each other. You will, nevertheless,
           note significant characteristics or historical information about each of them
           as individuals that you believe will eventually be relevant to current issues
                                                                                    
           in their relationship.                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                          ASK    BOTH     PARTNERS                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                How  they met.                                                      
                What attracted them to the other.                                   
                Whether they wish to work on improving the relationship.            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               First, though, inquire about the circumstances under which they met. 
           As with all history-taking, their answers to this question will provoke many
           others, such as: How old was each partner? Was this the first serious    
                                                                                    
           relationship for both of them? How did each of their families feel about 
           their choice of the other person? etc. If any or all of the answers emerge in
           the course of their recounting of their earliest relationship, so much the
                                                                                    
           better. If they don’t, it is preferable at this point to set those questions aside
           and allow the couple to reminisce for a while about a time when things in

=== Page 105 (1 cols) ===
the relationship felt differently from now. You should use this as an    
           opportunity to point out those things that sound as if they were meaningful,
           positive connections, even if you all have a sense that this relationship is
                                                                                    
           coming to an end in its present form.                                    
               Why would you want to do such a thing at this moment? Because if     
                                                                                    
           the couple is going to work on the relationship, they need to be reminded
           that times were better once, that there is some foundation on which this 
           partnership was built, and that, with some help from you and effort on their
                                                                                    
           part, perhaps they can recapture some of those feelings and reconstruct  
           those building blocks.                                                   
                                                                                    
               If this relationship is actually beginning to come to its end, then the
           retelling might begin the subtle process for both of them of realizing that
           those early feelings were a long time ago and can never be recaptured. You
                                                                                    
           may or may not necessarily be aware that this process is occurring, but they
           may experience some beginning acknowledgement that there is a real       
           ending commencing to a relationship that has had a history over time and a
                                                                                    
           life of its own. Without such a realization and an acceptance that they must
           face this ending and mourn the loss of this relationship-whether together or
                                                                                    
           separately-their ability to move forward and grow as individuals will be 
           slowed or perhaps permanently compromised.                               
               In either case, once they have finished describing their first meeting,
                                                                                    
           you will want to know from each of them what it was that attracted them to
           the other. Once again, these are crucial responses that you should explore
                                                                                    
           fully. Try to get each partner to elaborate. You should write down the   
           responses as close to verbatim as possible, because contained in these   
           answers will be some sense of what each hoped to find in a mate and      
                                                                                    
           whether it might be the absence-or presence-of those qualities that is now
           causing disappointment or friction.                                      
               That may sound like a paradox: that it could be either the absence or
                                                                                    
           the presence of the very qualities each saw in the other that is causing 
           conflict. It is, in fact, less puzzling than it sounds. Some examples will
                                                                                    
           perhaps be helpful, but only in tandem with an understanding of each of  
           three basic issues that a couple must resolve early in their relationship in
           order for it to grow without dissension.                                 
                                                                                    
               The first essential issue partners face when they become a couple is the
           question of who is going to be included in their life together and who is not.

=== Page 106 (1 cols) ===
For example, one partner may tell you that she was originally attracted to
           the other because the other had so many friends, or such a wonderful     
           family, or seemed so at ease with new situations. And that may, indeed,  
                                                                                    
           have been the appearance her prospective mate presented. Or it may have  
           been exactly what the partner thought at the time that she wanted for    
                                                                                    
           herself-to be a part of that warm, loving family or have all those caring
           friends.                                                                 
               However, the reality of the relationship over time may have proven   
                                                                                    
           something quite the contrary. Perhaps she found that her mate’s family   
           commitments took too much time away from their relationship, or that     
                                                                                    
           having so many casual acquaintances did not gratify her wish for a few   
           close friends, or that being close to one’s family meant that family members
           would come to live with you when they could no longer live by themselves 
                                                                                    
           and that she deeply resented their intrusion into her privacy.           
               Or perhaps her need for all that warmth and intimacy with all those  
           new people really did remain exactly as it had been when the two were    
                                                                                    
           courting. It could be the case that during that period of assessing each other
           as prospective partners her mate was actually choosing her because she   
                                                                                    
           seemed independent, made few demands on others, and had such an          
           admirable ability to keep other people from intruding into her life.     
               It is not hard to see, in this example or many others you can no doubt
                                                                                    
           conjure, how two people could start off by misinterpreting a quality they
           see in the other as being valuable, because it is so different from their own
                                                                                    
           disposition. However, it is also not hard to see how, with an issue as   
           fundamental as who will be in their life and who won’t and to what extent,
           the impact of those differences might have a profound effect on their    
                                                                                    
           relationship.                                                            
               Whenever there are differences - and there must be some in any       
           relationship between two people-then the second fundamental question that
                                                                                    
           must be addressed in order for a union to endure is: Who has control, and
           over what? To say that this issue can present itself in a thousand guises is
                                                                                    
           still to underestimate what a formidable force it can be in any relationship.
               Once again, this could have been a principal aspect of the initial   
           attraction between two people, and a factor dangerously undermining their
                                                                                    
           relationship today. For example, a partner may tell you that the attachment
           was based in some measure on feelings that the other person seemed to

=== Page 107 (1 cols) ===
know what needed to be done and did it, or never seemed to get uptight   
           about money, or seemed completely comfortable with the idea that both    
           would pursue their careers without interference. However, that same partner
                                                                                    
           who saw all that in her mate back then may report that she now finds the 
           other one too domineering, or unwilling to allow her to share in financial
                                                                                    
           decisions, or critical of the fact that she has just taken a job that will require
           her to travel.                                                           
               Given such scenarios, you might be able to see how unresolved issues 
                                                                                    
           involving control and choice-making are coming into play in the couple’s 
           current problem. Or one can certainly imagine the potential necessity to 
                                                                                    
           renegotiate this aspect of a relationship if a dramatic change occurs in the
           balance of control between two partners such as might take place if one of
           them developed a debilitating disease or suffered a job loss. In addition to
                                                                                    
           these more apparent examples, however, this aspect of conflict resolution
           can be significantly more difficult and infinitely more complex when it  
           involves subtler issues such as emotional control, or when children are used
                                                                                    
           as intermediaries, or when financial or physical control resides         
           predominantly with one of the partners.                                  
                                                                                    
               So you will be listening for this theme in the description of each   
           partner’s attraction to, and problems with, the other oneas well as conflicts
           involving inclusion and exclusion of others in their life. And you will also
                                                                                    
           be attentive to signs of the third major area that couples must negotiate for a
           successful outcome: affection. How close or how distant does each of these
                                                                                    
           partners need to be to the other in order to feel safe or comfortable or cared
           for or loved? Is there a significant difference between the needs of each
           partner in this regard? Does one express a wish for the other to be more 
                                                                                    
           demonstrative, while the mate complains of feeling smothered or intruded 
           upon or of constantly having to perform?                                 
               After the partners have finished describing how they met and what    
                                                                                    
           attracted each to the other, you will want, if you have time, to explore some
           brief history of the family configuration from which each of them came.  
                                                                                    
           Pay particular attention as you go to any suggestion either makes that the
           other reminds her of her mother, or her father, or any other significant 
           person from her past. If such a reference is made, you will certainly want to
                                                                                    
           know in what way her mate and that person are similar; make note of it and
           discuss it with your supervisor.

=== Page 108 (1 cols) ===
And finally, if there is time, you may or may not wish to take the   
           opportunity, again briefly, to explore something about the level of intimacy
           they are currently able to achieve. “May or may not” refers to the fact that
                                                                                    
           some therapists feel this is too intrusive a subject to raise in a first 
           interview, while others contend that it is important to include intimacy and
                                                                                    
           sexuality as appropriate subjects of discussion in couples therapy from the
           outset. Often, unless the therapist brings up these topics, they are never
           raised.                                                                  
                                                                                    
               If you and your supervisor concur in this view, then you should ask the
           partners if their level of intimacy has changed in the course of their   
                                                                                    
           relationship. If so, in what way? For example, are they currently having a
           sexual relationship? If not, when and why did it stop? If so, is the frequency
           satisfactory to both of them? Has anything changed about their level of  
                                                                                    
           desire or arousal? Are they both orgasmic? If not, were they ever?       
               Clearly, however, this and many other questions you might raise in the
           first interview with a couple are predicated on the assumption that the  
                                                                                    
           partners wish to try and work out their differences and stay together-an 
           assumption, as suggested before, which may not be true for both partners.
                                                                                    
           Although it is impossible to say where in a first interview you would ask the
           question, Do you want to work on improving your relationship? it is      
           certainly important, before you bring the interview to a close, that you do
                                                                                    
           ask it directly of each partner.                                         
               If the answer on the part of both clients is yes, then you can move  
                                                                                    
           toward the end of the interview with a discussion of such issues as      
           scheduling and fees. If one partner has expressed uncertainty, then it is time
           to explore how the couple wishes to proceed with this process-if at all. 
                                                                                    
               Do they want to think it over, or talk it over, and get back to you? Or
           has it become clear in this brief process of exploration that they now need
           to speak next to their pastor, or children, or lawyers, or friends? Once those
                                                                                    
           questions are resolved, you will have completed your first interview with a
           couple.                                                                  
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 109 (1 cols) ===
eight                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           H                                                                        
              OW      TO                                                            
                            D                                                       
                               ETERMINE                                             
                                                     W                              
                                                         HETHER                     
                                         A                                          
                     C                                                              
                        LIENT                                                       
                                     M                                              
                                         IGHT                                       
                                                    H                               
                                                       URT                          
             S                                                                      
               OMEBODY                                                              
                                   —I                                               
                                         NCLUDING                                   
                                                               Y                    
                                                                  OU                
           I                                                                        
            n the last chapter the question of menacing or disruptive behavior was  
           raised in the context of one partner of a couple threatening another. In this
           chapter we will explore how to think about, how to find out about, and what
           to do about the possibility that a client might present a potential threat to
           somebody else-including you. These concepts apply whether the client is  
           seen in an inpatient or outpatient setting and whether he is seen with others
           or by himself.                                                           
               If the notion that a client might represent a threat to you seems hard to
           think about, then it is important to pause for a moment and do a little  
           purposeful stereotyping-this time about ourselves.                       
               Therapists tend, very often, to devote a great deal of their mental and
           physical energies to the needs of others. We are seen by the world, and  
           frequently by ourselves, as sometimes thinking more about the difficulties
           our clients are experiencing, their need for human contact and acceptability
           and reassurance, than about our own needs. And because we frequently     
           work with people who have dread diseases, or are thought of by the larger
           community as “misfits” of one stripe or another, or are seriously mentally
                                                                                    
           ill, or have committed heinous crimes, we are regarded as being “gutsy” or
           “noble” or “fearless.” Unfortunately, sometimes we believe everything we 
           hear about ourselves.                                                    
                                                                                    
               If that remark sounds critical, it is not meant to be. It is intended to
           alert you to the possibility that one of your greatest virtues as a therapist-

=== Page 110 (1 cols) ===
your concern for the other person’s feelings-might sometimes put you in  
           jeopardy. It may be more difficult for you to allow yourself to recognize
           when you are in danger than it might be for someone who isn’t as         
                                                                                    
           concerned about others. Further, if you believe that you are always      
           supposed to appear “gutsy” or “noble” or “fearless,” and that anything less
                                                                                    
           is unprofessional, you might ignore some healthy, appropriate signals from
           yourself that you are at risk.                                           
               It is hoped that, if this book does nothing else, it will succeed in 
                                                                                    
           transmitting to you that there is absolutely nothing unprofessional about
           doing everything you can to appropriately safeguard your physical and    
                                                                                    
           mental well-being. In practical terms, that means that if you are afraid, you
           should tell someone. If you need information, or reassurance, or a second
           opinion, you should ask. And if you don’t feel more secure, you should ask
                                                                                    
           again.                                                                   
               Furthermore, if you are newly arrived in an agency, there should be  
           procedures already in place for managing client’s behavior and for       
                                                                                    
           minimizing the danger to the staff. Depending on the setting in which you
           work, these can include an inter-office buzzer system, a code word for   
                                                                                    
           alerting other staff that you are at risk, even a manual on ensuring worker
           safety. Ask your supervisor to sit down with you and go over these       
           procedures in detail. Ask questions. Find out the chain of command in the
                                                                                    
           event that you need to have assistance. Speak to your coworkers about what
           they have done in the past. In other words, take every opportunity to    
                                                                                    
           familiarize yourself with the procedures. Then think about them; don’t   
           assume that someone else is necessarily thinking about them for you.     
               When you are fully satisfied that you understand all the guidelines and
                                                                                    
           procedures for protecting yourself, find out everything you need to know 
           about your responsibilities and legal obligations in the event that a client
           talks about hurting a specific other person while in a session with you. 
                                                                                    
           Again, ask all the questions you need to ask. For example, to whom should
           you report such comments? What, if anything, should you say to the client?
                                                                                    
           What, if anything, should you say to the person who was threatened?

=== Page 111 (1 cols) ===
REMEMBER                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Find out what your legal obligations are if a client tells you he   
                                                                                    
                is going to hurt a specific person.                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Having done all that, you are ready to add to your array of assessment
           tools some guidelines for thinking about a client’s potential for violent
                                                                                    
           behavior, starting with two general principles. First, a client who has been
           violent in the past has not necessarily been violent in a way that is    
           dangerous to you as a therapist. Therefore, you have a particular        
                                                                                    
           responsibility to him-and to yourself-to make as thorough an assessment as
           possible of this aspect of his conduct. Otherwise, you may feel unduly   
                                                                                    
           fearful of that client or think that he should not be offered services at your
           agency. Second, a client who has never exhibited violent behavior before 
           may have reached a crisis point where his impulse control is threatening to
                                                                                    
           fail him. So, regardless of whether you are conducting a first interview or
           the person has been known to your agency in some context for years, you  
                                                                                    
           should be alert for both visible and historical signs of potential violence.
               We will start with identifying the historical signs. In order to do that,
           we begin where we always begin: by using what we know before we meet     
                                                                                    
           the client. If there is a case record, read it carefully, this time looking for
           some specific features, the first of which should be the client’s diagnosis -
           although it is important to state at the outset that, regardless of how benign
                                                                                    
           the diagnosis may be, it is never a guarantee that a client won’t commit a
           violent act. However, along with many other factors you will explore in  
                                                                                    
           reading the case record, it may help you to evaluate his dangerousness to
           you.                                                                     
               Knowing the diagnosis may be helpful to you in your preliminary      
                                                                                    
           thinking about this client, because some disorders have impulsivity or loss
           of control of aggressive feelings as a criterion. If you have not done so
                                                                                    
           before, you should find a current edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical
           Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) or some other diagnostic manual your

=== Page 112 (1 cols) ===
agency prefers, and familiarize yourself with the criteria for the diagnosis of
           this client.                                                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                  WHAT     TO   LOOK     FOR    IN  THE    CASE                     
             RECORD        WHEN      ASSESSING         A  CLIENT’S                  
                                                                                    
                POTENTIAL        FOR    VIOLENT       BEHAVIOR                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                A diagnosis that includes violent or impulsive behavior among       
                its criteria                                                        
                A previous history of violent behavior                              
                                                                                    
                A history of substance abuse                                        
                An injury to the head                                               
                An injury to the central nervous system                             
                                                                                    
                A previous history of physical abuse by others                      
                A previous history of suicidal behavior                             
                A previous history of delusions or hallucinations-particularly      
                                                                                    
                command   hallucinations                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               At the same time, however, you should bear in mind that what appears 
           in the case record is someone else’s diagnosis of this client. You need to
                                                                                    
           evaluate that source for reliability and recentness of the diagnosis. Further,
           as you already know, you can never, in any assessment, make your         
           judgment about a client based on only one factor. However, if the criteria
                                                                                    
           for the diagnosis this client has been given does include a potential for
           violent behavior, you should be certain to include that information in your
                                                                                    
           discussions with your supervisor before you meet the client.             
               The next aspect of the case record on which you should focus your    
           attention is the client’s previous mental status exam. By now it is hoped that
                                                                                    
           you have had an opportunity both to do a mental status exam on a client and
           to discuss it with other team members, so that you have had some         
                                                                                    
           experience with the various definitions and categories. If not, you are  
           looking particularly for indications that this person exhibits a high degree of

=== Page 113 (1 cols) ===
suspiciousness, or impaired judgment in social relationships, or a       
           preoccupation with violent thoughts, or a history of delusions or        
           hallucinations-particularly command hallucinations ordering him to hurt  
                                                                                    
           himself or someone else. When you are ready to discuss this case, these  
           facts from the mental status exam should also be shared with your        
                                                                                    
           supervisor.                                                              
               The next thing to look for in this client’s case recordwhether it is called
           a biopsychosocial assessment, or a comprehensive assessment, or a        
                                                                                    
           diagnostic evaluation, or any other name-is a written history on this client.
           First take note of how old the document is. The reason for this is that, in
                                                                                    
           evaluating a client’s potential for violence today, you are interested in some
           perspective over time on his judgment, impulse control, and most         
           importantly, previous violent behavior.                                  
                                                                                    
               Pay attention to how long this person has been acting in an impulsive,
           unpredictable, or assaultive way. For example, was he frequently suspended
           from school for fighting? Was he considered a delinquent by the juvenile 
                                                                                    
           justice system? Was he thrown out of his parents’ house for starting     
           trouble?                                                                 
                                                                                    
               Next you want to know, when he did start trouble, how serious did it 
           get? Did he use a weapon, or send someone else to the hospital, or did he
           punch his fist through a wall?                                           
                                                                                    
               And how often has he been involved in violent behavior? Does the     
           history, for example, suggest numerous arrests on minor charges that     
                                                                                    
           involved brawling or gang fights? Or did he hurt only one person on one  
           occasion? If so, who was that person, and how did the incident start? Is the
           prospective client a person who hit only his girlfriend? Or did he have  
                                                                                    
           constant verbal confrontations with his boss that eventually led to a violent
           outburst? Or did he never behave in an aggressive way until he was       
           hospitalized last year?                                                  
                                                                                    
               And lastly, you are going to pay particular attention to how recently
           this client was involved in an act that was dangerous or hurtful to another
                                                                                    
           person, how severe the injuries were, and whether or not a weapon of any 
           kind was involved. If no weapon was used, did the client do sufficient harm
           without a weapon to require a trip to the emergency room? Or did he do   
                                                                                    
           something more benign, involving verbal threats or destruction of        
           something the other person valued?

=== Page 114 (1 cols) ===
The answers to all these questions will help you and your supervisor 
           talk in an informed way about whether or not this is an appropriate client
           for your agency. If he is an appropriate client for your agency, is he an
                                                                                    
           appropriate client for you, based on your level of clinical experience?  
               However, before making either of those decisions, you need to explore
                                                                                    
           a few more areas in order to have a complete profile of a client’s       
           susceptibility to violent outbursts. For example, you should also look for
           indications that the client has a history of substance abuse. If so, you should
                                                                                    
           not assume-just because the client appears on paper not to have been a user
           for some time, or because you are meeting him in a confined setting where
                                                                                    
           it is presumed that he could not have access to drugs-that he is not presently
           abusing some substance or suffering from symptoms of withdrawal. If      
           either might be the case, you should remember that both current use of and
                                                                                    
           withdrawal from substances that cause intoxication of any sort-be it from
           snorting or shooting up, getting “loaded” with the boys or free-basing-  
           show a significant correlation with aggressive, unpredictable behavior.  
                                                                                    
               Next turn your attention to the client’s medical history, looking for
           several elements. First, is there any diagnosis or symptoms of an injury to
                                                                                    
           the head? For example, has the client ever complained of persistent      
           headaches or had seizures or a brain tumor? Has he suffered any insult to
           his central nervous system, such as Alzheimer’s, or a stroke, or any other
                                                                                    
           infection or exposure to a toxic substance that could cause damage? Is there
           any indication of physical abuse or neglect in his medical history? For  
                                                                                    
           example, does it describe bruises, broken limbs, or hospitalizations at a very
           young age? Or did he have an “accident” under circumstances that suggest 
           that it might have been caused by someone else?                          
                                                                                    
               This last issue, past physical abuse or neglect, is something you may
           only be able to deduce from the medical history. It is important to evaluate,
           however, because its relevance for a client’s potential for violent behavior
                                                                                    
           may go far beyond considerations about whether or not it has caused      
           permanent damage to the physical organism. It can also have profound     
                                                                                    
           implications for the person’s judgment about how conflicts get resolved, or
           what the nature or purpose of relationships is, or how one must act to be
           respected in the world. Impairment in the understanding of any of these  
                                                                                    
           could be a factor in violent behavior.

=== Page 115 (1 cols) ===
The last piece of information for which you should scrutinize the    
           medical history, if it is not mentioned elsewhere, is any indication of  
           suicidal behavior. Were some of those “accidents” alluded to above really
                                                                                    
           suicide attempts? Were injuries or hospitalizations sufficiently unexplained,
           or illogical, or unlikely to have been randomly caused to suggest that this
                                                                                    
           client might have been intending to hurt himself? If your suspicions are 
           raised, note your concerns and talk about them with your supervisor. Bear
           in mind that a suicide attempt is sometimes an impulsive, unplanned      
                                                                                    
           behavior, which is why it is relevant to consider as a predictor of possible
           violence against others.                                                 
                                                                                    
               Having explored all these areas prior to seeing your client, you and 
           your supervisor now can make an informed decision about whether or not   
           you will see this client. If so, you will proceed to discuss how, where, and
                                                                                    
           under what circumstances to conduct the interview.                       
               However, all that is based on several assumptions, any one of which  
           might not be true. It presumes that you have a written record to evaluate,
                                                                                    
           that your agency setting is one in which an unknown client could never   
           simply appear in the waiting room requiring attention, and that you always
                                                                                    
           have a supervisor readily available with whom to discuss your actions and
           decisions ahead of time.                                                 
               Since none of the above may be true, let us explore how to meet a    
                                                                                    
           client under less desirable circumstances and still feel reasonably confident
           that you know how to do a preliminary assessment for the risk of imminent
                                                                                    
           violent behavior. This preliminary assessment is designed to permit you to
           be appropriately cautious and still be calm and responsive to a client   
           whoregardless of his presentation of himself as potentially menacing-is, 
                                                                                    
           nevertheless, a person in need of help.                                  
               In order to do that, we will spend the rest of this chapter outlining the
           steps you should take if one day, a receptionist or another clinician buzzes
                                                                                    
           you on the intercom and tells you that there is a client waiting in the  
           reception area about whom nothing is known, and that no one else has time
                                                                                    
           to see him.                                                              
               The first question you are going to ask the person at the other end of
           the intercom, if he or she does not offer some information, is: How does he
                                                                                    
           look? If the response is, “He’s pacing all over the waiting room,” or “He
           looks stoned to me,” or “crazy,” or “nervous,” or “loud,” or “out of it,” or

=== Page 116 (1 cols) ===
“He sounds weird,” or “He’s rambling,” then pursue this line of questioning
           and get some sense of whether or not you want to alert someone else that 
           you are concerned even before you go out to the waiting room.            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
              EIGHT     WAYS     TO   AVOID     GETTING       HURT                  
                                                                                    
                                 BY   A  CLIENT                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            1. Know the security procedures in your agency.                         
                                                                                    
            2. Make appointments with new clients at times when senior staff        
                members  are in the office.                                         
            3. If the person has no appointment, ask the receptionist how he        
                                                                                    
                looks and is behaving in the waiting room.                          
            4. When you approach a client about whom there is concern,              
                always keep your distance.                                          
                                                                                    
            5. Keep your hands visible throughout the interview.                    
            6. Don’t make any abrupt movements.                                     
                                                                                    
            7. Don’t sit or stand in a place that blocks his exit or yours.         
            8. Don’t make provocative comments.                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Once you have made a decision in that regard, proceed to the waiting 
                                                                                    
           room and take a look at the client yourself. Is he staring at the floor or out
           into space, apparently unaware of the environment? Is he pacing or       
           jabbering to others in an animated or agitated way? Is he looking around 
                                                                                    
           nervously or wiping his palms on his pant legs? Is he breathing heavily or
           saying scary things to people? Does any behavior or gesture suggest to you
           that he has a weapon? All of these are signals that will help you decide 
                                                                                    
           whether or not to approach the client at all, and if so, with what degree of
           caution.                                                                 
                                                                                    
               If your decision is to approach him, your purpose is to transmit a sense
           of calmness but not vulnerability. You should move toward him with a     
           relaxed gait and your hands at your sides in a casual way. You want him to
                                                                                    
           be able to see clearly from a distance that you are not coming toward him in

=== Page 117 (1 cols) ===
a threatening fashion. You should keep your hands visible throughout the 
           time you are speaking with him.                                          
               As you get closer you will again be observing for certain cues. Are the
                                                                                    
           client’s eyes bloodshot or bleary, suggesting substance use? Is he constantly
           scanning the room for indications of danger to himself? Does he look     
                                                                                    
           disorganized or disheveled? Does he smell?                               
               Regardless of what you observe, you should always stop and speak     
           politely to him from a position that assures three things: first, that you are at
                                                                                    
           a sufficient distance so that he knows you cannot physically touch him;  
           second, that you are not standing in a place-should he move toward you-  
                                                                                    
           from which you cannot easily step aside or retreat; and third, that you are
           not standing in a place that blocks his access to a doorway, should he feel
           the need to flee.                                                        
                                                                                    
               When you speak to this client, you should do so with the same respect
           you would show for any other and in a reassuring and calm way. And if    
           anything he says or has done up to this point raises serious concern or  
                                                                                    
           suggests that he looks or feels out of control-or has the potential to become
           so-then you should find a way to conduct the initial stages of the interview
                                                                                    
           standing in a place in the waiting area where others can see the two of you,
           but which allows the client to speak to you without being overheard.     
               Considering that this is your first interview with a client who has  
                                                                                    
           aroused some concern in you about the possibility that your own safety   
           might be threatened, then perhaps this ought to be a prearranged signal. 
                                                                                    
           That is, if you make a decision not to take this client into your office, it
           means you would like some assistance from this point forward.            
               Such an arrangement would give you the experience of observing an    
                                                                                    
           interview with this client by a more experienced clinician. Ideally, that other
           interviewer should be your supervisor, but if that is not possible, then some
           other senior staff person should join you so that the two of you can later
                                                                                    
           assess your concerns and your responses to this client. Once you have done
           so, it is likely that the next time such a situation occurs, you will have more
                                                                                    
           confidence and certainty about how to proceed beyond this point.         
               So that is how you would handle the situation of a possibly violent  
           client if you either have the option of preparing yourself ahead of time by
                                                                                    
           reading data about him in his case record or have the chance to observe and
           assess the client in a public area. It is hoped that both of those opportunities

=== Page 118 (1 cols) ===
would be used by you to prevent, if it is at all possible, a scenario in which
           you find yourself in your office with a client whom you begin to sense   
           might be dangerous. Even then, it is possible to minimize the risk by    
                                                                                    
           keeping the door to your office open or, if it is already closed, by always
           sitting in a place in your office where you do not need to pass the client to
                                                                                    
           open the door, preferably with a desk or table between you. Further, you can
           assure that your office does not contain objects that are large enough or
           heavy enough to be harmful if thrown.                                    
                                                                                    
               In addition, you can talk with your supervisor about the variety of  
           verbal methods that are helpful in calming a client and assuring that the
                                                                                    
           interview can be brought to a safe conclusion: for example, telling a client
           about whom you are concerned that he can leave anytime if he begins to   
           feel upset or uncomfortable; or, if he seems to you to be getting upset or
                                                                                    
           uncomfortable as he talks about a particular subject, suggesting that he need
           not talk about that issue right now; or, if he refuses for any reason to speak
           or appears angry or frustrated, suggesting to him that you stop for now and
                                                                                    
           that he think about coming back when he feels more like talking. Further, if
           a client indicates that he wants to end a session, or if he gets up and leaves a
                                                                                    
           session at any time, with or without an indication, let him go. Then discuss
           the way to approach this kind of behavior with your supervisor before    
           planning another meeting with this client.                               
                                                                                    
               All these recommendations are based on two crucial assumptions. The  
           first is your understanding that-unless a great deal is known about any  
                                                                                    
           client and a team decision has been made that it is clinically indicated-using
           confrontational or verbally aggressive tactics in any interview with any 
           client is both risky and disrespectful, particularly since it is never your job
                                                                                    
           to be judge and jury, regardless of the circumstances under which you meet
           a client. The second is your understanding that-even when a great deal is
           known about a client-you will always conduct your own mental assessment  
                                                                                    
           based on the tools you would use in any interview. If that assessment or 
           your feelings about the client’s potential for violent behavior suggest that
                                                                                    
           someone (including you) is at imminent risk, you will listen first and   
           foremost to yourself and act accordingly.                                
               Finally, it is important for you to think about and, when appropriate,
                                                                                    
           discuss with your supervisor your own limits for tolerating fears of     
           violence. In so doing, you will be better able to accept two fundamental

=== Page 119 (1 cols) ===
realities about the nature of this work: first, that you are going to be 
           frightened of clients from time to time no matter how well you prepare   
           yourself; second, that with experience and time you will become better able
                                                                                    
           to accept your own feelings and fears and still be confident that you know
           when and how to adequately safeguard your wellbeing.                     
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 120 (1 cols) ===
nine                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           H                                                                        
              OW      TO                                                            
                            D                                                       
                               ETERMINE                                             
                                                     W                              
                                                         HETHER                     
                                         A                                          
            C                                                                       
               LIENT                                                                
                            M                                                       
                                IGHT                                                
                                          H                                         
                                              URT                                   
                                                       H                            
                                                          ERSELF                    
           J                                                                        
             ust as the last chapter explored the idea that we might sometimes ignore
           thoughts that we could be in danger, so we must start this chapter by    
           addressing the powerful wish to avoid thinking that another human being  
           might deliberately take her own life. Yet, as we all know, suicide-quite 
           literally-happens every day.                                             
               Some of those people who die every day might be acquaintances or     
           friends or even relatives of ours. They could also be acquaintances or   
           friends or relatives of our clients-or they could be our clients. If we accept
           that unthinkable thought as within the realm of possibility, then where  
           should we begin, as therapists, to think constructively about the idea that
           someone we are interested in, care about, and wish to help might one day 
           feel so desperate or hopeless or rageful as to take or attempt to take her own
           life? How do we realistically assess how much we can do to prevent such a
           terrible outcome?                                                        
                                                                                    
               First we must accept a sad but utterly truthful fact: Any person who 
           truly wants to end her life, other than a very young child or a completely
           incapacitated adult, will find a way to do so. You may wish to change that,
                                                                                    
           you may try to change it, you may believe you have changed it, but you   
           may fail. That is a fact.                                                
                                                                                    
               Having accepted that reality, you should know that there is a great deal
           you can do and should do and will learn to do that can significantly alter a
           client’s feeling that life is not worth living, or that no one cares if she lives
                                                                                    
           or dies, or that she cannot solve the problems that are making her consider
           suicide as a solution. The purpose of this chapter is to help you recognize

=== Page 121 (1 cols) ===
those sentiments in a client, face them with her, and protect her from them
           as much as is humanly possible.                                          
               This chapter will explore how to assess and respond to suicidal      
                                                                                    
           thoughts and actions in both adults and children. If this last idea-that 
           children can have such sadness or hopelessness or anger or fear within them
                                                                                    
           that they wish to die-makes thinking about suicide seem overwhelming,    
           then perhaps some facts repeatedly documented by research will be helpful.
           Let us begin with children and move chronologically along the spectrum of
                                                                                    
           suicide.                                                                 
               Deliberate suicides have occurred in children as young as four years 
                                                                                    
           old, but in general suicides under the age of 12 are uncommon.           
               Among adolescents, girls are considerably more likely to attempt     
           suicide; however, boys are considerably more likely to complete a suicide.
                                                                                    
               The most frequent suicide attempts occur in women under 30; then the 
           incidence of attempts begins to decrease. Also, women tend, in general, to
           use less reliably lethal methods of trying to kill themselves, such as   
                                                                                    
           overdoses of pills or slashing their wrists.                             
               The most frequent completed suicides occur in men over 45, and the   
                                                                                    
           risk factor continues to grow-particularly in white males-culminating in the
           greatest rate of completion after age 65. In addition, men use more certain
           methods, such as guns, hanging themselves, and jumping from high places. 
                                                                                    
               Those are the bare-bones statistics about the populations most at risk.
           It is hoped that these statistics-like all statistics-are reassuring because they
                                                                                    
           are verifiable and relatively neutral. However, as a therapist you must also
           recognize and think about the powerful myths society has concerning      
           suicide, two of which have been proven over and over again not to be true,
                                                                                    
           but persist anyway, even among therapists-sometimes with fatal           
           consequences.                                                            
               The first myth is: A person who is thinking about killing herself will
                                                                                    
           never tell anyone.                                                       
               The fact is that most people who take their own lives have given some
                                                                                    
           sign of their intentions to at least one other person- and often to several
           other people-within the last few weeks or months. That sign may be verbal
           and quite direct-whether said in a joking manner or quite seriously. For 
                                                                                    
           example, a person may say, “I wish I was dead,” or “I think I may kill   
           myself,” or “What do you suppose it’s like to be dead?” or some other clear

=== Page 122 (1 cols) ===
statement indicating to those around her that she is having thoughts about
           ending her life.                                                         
               Or it may be said less directly, for example: “I’m so tired I wish I 
                                                                                    
           could sleep for years,” or “Nothing interests me anymore,” or “What      
           difference does it make if I failed that exam?” or many other variations that
                                                                                    
           suggest despondency, or hopelessness, or a lack of interest in the future or
           in her own well-being. Or it may be expressed as anger and a wish for    
           revenge against another person who has disappointed her, or threatened her
                                                                                    
           feeling of being loved, or humiliated her, such as “I’ll show him who can
           leave…”                                                                  
                                                                                    
               In addition, there are many nonverbal ways in which a person might   
           indicate to others that she is thinking about hurting herself or that she is
           losing interest in staying alive. She might stop eating, or give away some
                                                                                    
           possessions, or have her telephone disconnected, or start taking drugs, or go
           to a doctor for a physical symptom.                                      
               Finally, the most dramatic and significant way in which a person might
                                                                                    
           indicate that she is thinking about suicide is by making an attempt on her
           life that is not fatal or even necessarily very dangerous in and of itself. The
                                                                                    
           purpose might be to see how others respond or to “practice” not caring what
           happens to herself. In either case, a suicide attempt should certainly be
           regarded as a foreboding sign.                                           
                                                                                    
               These are some of the common ways by which to recognize that the     
           first myth about suicide-that most people who are going to kill themselves
                                                                                    
           do so without any warning-is simply not true. It is hoped that this      
           clarification will go some way toward reassuring you that if a client of 
           yours is thinking about killing herself there is a very good likelihood that
                                                                                    
           you can get some indication, provided you know when and how to ask and   
           are able to both listen and talk about suicide yourself.                 
               This brings us to the second myth about suicide: If you talk about   
                                                                                    
           suicide, that will put the idea into a person’s head and she will kill herself.
               The facts are that talking about suicide does not cause suicide and that
                                                                                    
           not talking about suicide with someone who is thinking of hurting herself
           can sometimes be a fatal mistake. Nevertheless, most of us need some help
           in knowing what to say, what to ask that might be helpful, and how and   
                                                                                    
           when to bring up the subject. So let us start with the last question: how and

=== Page 123 (1 cols) ===
when you would consider raising the subject of whether or not a client you
           are seeing, especially for the first time, might be considering suicide. 
               Again, you would begin with the existing record on that client, starting
                                                                                    
           first with the diagnosis and looking up the criteria. As in the case of violent
           tendencies, you are looking in both children and adults for diagnoses that
                                                                                    
           include impulsivity, poor judgment, antisocial or suicidal tendencies as part
           of the criteria for the diagnosis itself. If there are no indications of any of
           these, then you would next be alert to any diagnoses that suggest depression
                                                                                    
           or intense anxiety. However, as with all diagnoses, the absence of such  
           criteria is never in and of itself a reason to rule out the possibility that a
                                                                                    
           client might be thinking about or even planning to hurt herself.         
               Next turn to the mental status exam, paying particular attention to the
           previous questioner’s comments on the client’s suicidal ideation at that 
                                                                                    
           time. This lets you know if the client has told someone before that she was
           thinking about hurting herself. In addition, be alert to the person’s    
           predominant mood at the time the MSE was formulated and to any thoughts  
                                                                                    
           that were preoccupying her at that time, so that you can assess, as you do
           your mental status exam, whether or not this person continues to be “stuck”
                                                                                    
           on the same unhappy or unrealistic thoughts she was having then. Further,
           note any history of delusions, depersonalization, or hallucinations-     
           especially command hallucinations ordering her to hurt herself or someone
                                                                                    
           else.                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                  REMEMBER                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Talking to a client about her suicidal thoughts makes it less       
                                                                                    
                likely that she will kill herself.                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Focus next on her written history, looking for three essential elements.
           First, ascertain whether the client is a substance abuser, because, as was
                                                                                    
           mentioned in the previous chapter, alcohol and drugs engender behavior   
           that people might not otherwise do. That is, they are “disinhibitors” which

=== Page 124 (1 cols) ===
both physiologically and psychologically limit the user’s capacity to think
           logically, to move steadily, and sometimes to appropriately protect others
           and herself. Drugs, alcohol, or both have been implicated in at least half the
                                                                                    
           known suicides in the United States; they figure even more prominently in
           adolescent suicides.                                                     
                                                                                    
               In addition, read the written record for any family history of suicide or
           suicide attempts. Is suicide seen in this client’s family as a means of  
           problem-solving? Has suicide ever been used as a way of relieving medical
                                                                                    
           or psychiatric suffering? Whatever the reason, any previous suicide in your
           client’s family places her at higher risk for suicide.                   
                                                                                    
               The last critical factor for which you would examine the record is a 
           history of previous suicide attempts by the client, since the single most
           reliable predictor of a suicide attempt in the future is a suicide attempt in
                                                                                    
           the past. If that suicide attempt has occurred within the last year, the client
           is in the highest risk group for another, possibly fatal attempt.        
               If you saw such a profile in the written record of a client, you might
                                                                                    
           feel that you did not even wish to see her. That is certainly an issue you
           should discuss with your supervisor, because it is important and useful for
                                                                                    
           you to explore your own personal experiences related to the issue of suicide
           and to think ahead about your feelings concerning such a client, just as you
           would before any first interview.                                        
                                                                                    
               However, it is also important for you to realize that people who come
           for help are people who have problems, many of which they have not yet   
                                                                                    
           found a way either to resolve or to tolerate. What that means in practical
           terms is that at some time in your career you are certainly going to have a
           client who has made a suicide attempt-whether that information appears in
                                                                                    
           the written record or not. And just as certainly, you are going to find it
           necessary at some juncture to evaluate a man, woman, or child for the    
           possibility that one of them is presently thinking about, or planning, to kill
                                                                                    
           him or herself.                                                          
               So the first thing you need to do for yourself is to get comfortable with
                                                                                    
           the idea that you are going to be talking to people from time to time about
           suicidal thoughts and behavior. You are going to find out what procedures
           exist in your agency for managing potentially suicidal clients. For example,
                                                                                    
           who are you to speak to if such a scenario occurs? What telephone number

=== Page 125 (1 cols) ===
do you call? Where do you ask a person to wait if you need to consult with
           a colleague? What have other people on the staff done in such situations?
               Next you are going to explore in detail what your legal obligations are.
                                                                                    
           For example, if someone reports to you that she is seriously thinking about
           or has a plan to kill herself, what rules of confidentiality, if any, apply? Who
                                                                                    
           must you notify, and when? What kinds of notes do you need to keep during
           the session? What kinds of forms do you need to fill out after the interview?
           To what agencies and governing bodies are you required to report such a  
                                                                                    
           discussion? What follow-up, if any, is necessary?                        
               In other words, you are going to get as much practical information as
                                                                                    
           you can, because practical information is extremely helpful in overcoming
           the tendency to deny that someone you are with might be having thoughts  
           or fantasies about hurting herself. When you are actually face-to-face with a
                                                                                    
           client, regardless of what has been said or what you know about that person,
           if you have the slightest inkling that she might be suicidal, you must rely on
           that inkling enough to slowly but surely explore with the client whether or
                                                                                    
           not she has had, or is presently having, any thoughts about killing herself.
           The operative words here are “slowly but surely.” That is, you are going to
                                                                                    
           ask questions in a deliberate and calm manner, reminding yourself at such
           times of two crucial facts: first, that people who are having thoughts of
           killing themselves are both relieved and grateful to have someone else bring
                                                                                    
           it up; and second, that many people think about killing themselves from  
           time to time but most of them neither wish to die nor actually take their own
                                                                                    
           lives.                                                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                  REMEMBER                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                You must find out what your legal obligations are if a client       
                                                                                    
                tells you she is thinking about killing herself.                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               So where do you begin if you are having some feeling of unease about 
           this client? The answer is: with a broad question, such as, “How are you

=== Page 126 (1 cols) ===
feeling?” or “How are things these days?” What you are listening for in the
           answer is despair, despondency, or hopelessness. For example, as you     
           explore a little with the client, does she express any feeling that things in
                                                                                    
           her life are unbearable? Or that she feels unable to go on? Or that she is so
           lonely for someone who used to be in her life but is no longer that she  
                                                                                    
           cannot imagine the future without that person?                           
               These kinds of feelings are more easily articulated by adults than   
           children. If you are interviewing a child, particularly under the age of nine
                                                                                    
           or ten, you will need to help her describe how she is feeling and the    
           seriousness of the feelings she is experiencing. Therefore, when you are 
                                                                                    
           trying to assess the possibility of suicidal thoughts or feelings of despair in
           a child, always give her something by which to measure them. For example:
           “Do you think you feel more happy or more sad today?” “When you are      
                                                                                    
           sad, are you so sad you cry?” “Do you cry in the day and the night?” “Do 
           you cry when you are alone, or when there are other people around?” Use a
           similar technique for angry feelings, or feelings of missing someone     
                                                                                    
           important who has died or gone away recently, or feelings that she has done
           something wrong.                                                         
                                                                                    
               Once you have begun to get a sense of the broad parameters of the    
           client’s mood, you want to find out if, when she is feeling that badly, she
           ever has any thoughts about hurting herself. Obviously, the answer you are
                                                                                    
           wishing and hoping for is “Never,” or “Are you kidding?” or “I’d be too  
           scared to do something like that,” or “I could never do that to my children,”
                                                                                    
           or just plain “No.” However, as much as you might wish for one of those  
           answers, eventually someone is going to say “Yes,” and no matter how     
           many times you have practiced such a scenario in your head or talked about
                                                                                    
           it with your colleagues, you are still going to feel frightened.         
               At first, you will be tempted-despite all your preparations-to try and
           talk the client out of having those thoughts, rather than exploring them with
                                                                                    
           her. You may find yourself wanting to say, “You shouldn’t be thinking    
           about things like that,” or “Don’t be silly, you have so much to be grateful
                                                                                    
           for,” or some other variation on these themes. The younger the client, the
           more likely you are to feel the temptation. But you are going to have to 
           resist it.                                                               
                                                                                    
               What will help you to do so is to again remind yourself that lots of 
           people think about killing themselves at one time or another. Also remind

=== Page 127 (1 cols) ===
yourself that, because the client has acknowledged having such thoughts, 
           you now have a mandate to explore them with her and to rule out the      
           possibility that she might go beyond just thinking about suicide. Therefore,
                                                                                    
           regardless of when this subject comes up in an interview, and regardless of
           what else you might have on your calendar to do after this interview, you
                                                                                    
           should make a practice-both for the client’s wellbeing and your own-of   
           never letting a client leave your office until you have used all necessary
           resources to satisfy yourself that she is not at imminent risk of trying to kill
                                                                                    
           herself.                                                                 
               Let us return to the moment at which you inquire about whether or not
                                                                                    
           a client ever has thoughts of hurting herself and the answer is “yes.” In
           clinical parlance, this is what constitutes suicidal ideation. When you  
           uncover the presence of suicidal ideation, two things are required of you:
                                                                                    
           First, if you are not already doing so, you must start taking notes, as  
           carefully as possible. Second, once you have established the existence of
           some form of suicidal ideation, you need to know what the content of that
                                                                                    
           ideation is. So you are going to ask the client some question like, “When
           you think about hurting yourself, how do you imagine doing it?” The      
                                                                                    
           response you get to this question will be somewhere on a spectrum        
           between, “I don’t know, I never really get that far,” to “I think about  
           jumping off the roof of my building,” or some other comment that suggests
                                                                                    
           thoughts of a specific mode of suicide.                                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                  REMEMBER                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Most people who are thinking about killing themselves don’t         
                                                                                    
                really want to do it.                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Or you may first get a response from the client like, “I’m not really
           gonna kill myself,” or “I was just kidding,” or some other reaction intended
                                                                                    
           to change the topic of conversation or minimize the seriousness of this very
           serious subject. At this point, or whenever it seems most appropriate, let the

=== Page 128 (1 cols) ===
client know that you are glad to hear that she isn’t really going to kill
           herself, because you don’t want anything to happen to her.               
               This is a very powerful message, and its purpose is twofold. It is a 
                                                                                    
           reassurance to a person of any age that someone else is concerned about her
           and that-were she, in truth, actually giving serious thought to taking her
                                                                                    
           own life-someone else cares whether or not she does so. Second, it       
           demonstrates that you take everything she thinks and feels very seriously,
           particularly any thoughts she might have about killing herself; therefore,
                                                                                    
           you are going to need to ask a few more questions to make absolutely     
           certain that she is safe.                                                
                                                                                    
               You next want to find out when the client last had a thought about   
           hurting herself. Obviously, a response such as “this morning” is more    
           significant than “two years ago when I broke up with my boyfriend.” In   
                                                                                    
           either case, however, pursue information about how frequently those      
           thoughts occur or occurred. For example, if the answer was “this morning,”
           then you would want to know whether the client had these thoughts        
                                                                                    
           yesterday, and if so, how many times. And if she had them yesterday, you 
           want to know when she started having these thoughts and whether they are 
                                                                                    
           happening more or less frequently than before. Also, when she is having  
           these thoughts, are they fleeting? Or do they seem to be coming with     
           greater intensity and interfering more with her life?                    
                                                                                    
               When you have ascertained those impressions from her, you need to    
           find out how comfortable the client is with those thoughts when she does 
                                                                                    
           have them. For example, you might ask her how she feels when she has     
           those thoughts. The response you are hoping for is one that suggests that
           they “scare the hell out of me” or “they really upset me.” However, if there
                                                                                    
           is any suggestion in the client’s response that these thoughts are soothing or
           seem like a solution to all her problems, or promise reunion with a loved
           one, then that would significantly affect your evaluation of the state of
                                                                                    
           imminent risk to this clientunless the client is a child.                
               Very young children are the most significant exception. Children under
                                                                                    
           the age of seven or eight may appear to be comfortable with the idea of  
           dying because they probably don’t know in any real sense what it means to
           be dead. Therefore, if a child says that she wants to be dead so she can see
                                                                                    
           her grandfather, you need to find out whether she thinks she could talk with
           her grandfather if she were dead. Could she go out and play? Or bring her

=== Page 129 (1 cols) ===
grandfather back home with her? If the child demonstrates a clear        
           understanding that death is a real ending of her life, that all the bodily
           functions cease, and that the separation from her caretakers is real, then you
                                                                                    
           must believe that her wish to die is quite serious.                      
               Once you have explored how clearly the client understands the idea of
                                                                                    
           dying, and how comfortable that idea seems to her, turn your attention to
           whether or not the client has ever tried to kill herself. If she has, how did
           she do it? While she is explaining that attempt to you, ask yourself: Was
                                                                                    
           this last attempt not completed because the client’s own better judgment or
           wish to live intervened? Or would this person be dead now were it not for
                                                                                    
           ignorance on her part of what actually constituted a fatal dosage, or    
           someone showing up unexpectedly, or some other piece of sheer luck?      
               At this point-or perhaps even earlier, depending on what the client has
                                                                                    
           already told you-you may have decided that you are going to need a second
           opinion on whether or not this client is in imminent danger. Once you have
           begun to think that is necessary, the question then becomes: Why would   
                                                                                    
           you continue to explore this subject with the client, rather than leaving that
           to someone with more expertise or experience?                            
                                                                                    
               The reasons are twofold. First, once a client has begun to share such
           information with you and to feel your concern, she may be more willing to
           go into details or share her plans with you than with someone else. In fact,
                                                                                    
           in a subsequent interview, she might deny that she has any thoughts of   
           hurting herself. Therefore, the more specific, detailed information you can
                                                                                    
           share with the other interviewer, or team of people, the more likely it is that
           the client will get the level of care she needs to guarantee her safety. 
               Second, depending on the setting in which you work and the severity  
                                                                                    
           of the client’s danger to herself, getting that level of care may entail having
           your supervisor join you and the client, or arranging for the client to be
           interviewed by your staff psychiatrist right then, or contacting your local
                                                                                    
           emergency room and taking the client there, or waiting with the client until
           a member of her family is available to come and get her. However, it might
                                                                                    
           also require that you call the police to take the client to a hospital or that
           you present your findings to a team of psychiatrists who will use that   
           information as part of their deliberations on whether or not to hospitalize a
                                                                                    
           client involuntarily. So the thoroughness of your interview not only is good

=== Page 130 (1 cols) ===
practice but may also be crucial to protecting the client’s safety-and her
           rights.                                                                  
               Very often, though, clinicians feel uneasy-particularly in those settings
                                                                                    
           where they are the client’s primary therapistabout pursuing an interview 
           when they realize that the client is telling them information that will need to
                                                                                    
           go outside the confines of the confidential relationship between the two of
           them. Somehow, it begins to feel sneaky, or underhanded, or manipulative 
           to ask further questions when you know you cannot keep the answers to    
                                                                                    
           yourself.                                                                
               Should you reach this juncture with a client who is describing thoughts
                                                                                    
           of killing herself, two ideas are useful. First, anyone willing to tell you her
           feelings, or thoughts, or plans to kill herself is almost certainly doing so
           because she wants you to help her not to. Second, if that is not the case, and
                                                                                    
           she truly does want to harm herself, then a human life is at stake and you
           must certainly act to protect her.                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
              SIX   THINGS      YOU    NEED     TO   FIND   OUT    IF               
              A  CLIENT     TELLS      YOU    SHE    IS THINKING                    
                                                                                    
                       ABOUT       KILLING     HERSELF                              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            1. When did she last have a thought about killing herself?              
            2. How often does she think about killing herself?                      
                                                                                    
            3. How comforting do these thoughts seem to her?                        
            4. Has she made a previous suicide attempt?                             
            5. Does she now have a plan to kill herself?                            
                                                                                    
            6. Can she carry out the plan?                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Having ascertained a history of her previous attempt or attempts, turn
           your attention to whether or not this client presently has a plan to kill
                                                                                    
           herself. If she had previously indicated some thought such as, “I’d jump off
           the roof of my building,” return to that comment and explore it further. For

=== Page 131 (1 cols) ===
example, ask her if she has actually gone up on the roof recently or, if the
           client is a child, whether she can actually get to the roof on her own.  
               If she has made no previous comment suggesting a plan, then ask some 
                                                                                    
           simple, straightforward questions such as, “How would you do it if you   
           were going to kill yourself?” Again, you are hoping for the vaguest possible
                                                                                    
           response suggesting the least premeditation. But if the client says, “I would
           take a bunch of pills,” or “I would shoot myself,” or “I would jump out a
           window,” then you need to proceed in a very deliberate manner to evaluate
                                                                                    
           the issue of access to means, which will, in turn, help you to determine the
           level of premeditation. For example, if a person says, “I would take a bunch
                                                                                    
           of pills,” ask what kind of pills she would take. She may say, “I have no
           idea,” or “I don’t know, maybe a bunch of aspirin”; both of those answers
           are quite different from saying, “I got a bottle of uppers put away,” or 
                                                                                    
           “When my mother died, I kept everything she had in her medicine cabinet.”
               Clearly, the latter two responses suggest that this person has been  
           thinking about the possibility of ending her life for some time. The same
                                                                                    
           would be true of someone who has access to someone else’s gun, such as a 
           child or adolescent who reports that her father has a gun in the top drawer,
                                                                                    
           or to an adult who tells you she has recently purchased a weapon.        
               With all clients but especially with children, listen for and explore the
           temptation to some more impulsive, although somewhat premeditated, form  
                                                                                    
           of suicide. For example, if a child tells you she would jump out a window,
           find out if she knows what window she would jump out of. If she says, “the
                                                                                    
           one on the stairs at school,” find out if she ever has gone near that window
           when it was open, whether or not there is ever a time when she can go near
           that window without being seen, and whether or not she has ever actually 
                                                                                    
           climbed out on the sill.                                                 
               Obviously, by this time you will have reached a conclusion about     
           whether or not this person might do something dangerous to herself and   
                                                                                    
           made a decision that someone else needs to be informed. However, before  
           you raise that subject, there is one more piece of information you want to
                                                                                    
           garner, particularly with a child. That is why she wants to kill herself at this
           time, although you are not going to phrase it that way. Instead, you are 
           going to ask the person something about what she thinks will happen if she
                                                                                    
           tries to commit suicide. If you don’t already know, you may hear an answer
           that will help illuminate for you what current conflict is making the client

=== Page 132 (1 cols) ===
feel so desperate. For example, “My mommy will feel sorry she hit me     
           yesterday,” or “I won’t really die, I’ll just scare everybody,” or “I won’t
           have to worry about my ex-husband’s bills,” or “My boyfriend will be sorry
                                                                                    
           he dumped me and we’ll get back together again,” or “My sister will come 
           home and find me.”                                                       
                                                                                    
               Whatever the answer, respond to it by telling the client, in one way or
           another, that there are many other solutions to the problem that is making
           her feel so badly at the moment, but that your first concern is making sure
                                                                                    
           that she doesn’t hurt herself. Especially if this is a new experience, you
           should always err on the side of caution if you have any doubts about the
                                                                                    
           need for a second opinion.                                               
               You should have discussed well in advance with other members of the  
           treatment team what the procedure is in your agency; this is the time to 
                                                                                    
           implement it. Once you have done all that, you should feel a great sense of
           relief and of accomplishment.                                            
               However, regrettably, it is not always that simple to assess whether or
                                                                                    
           not a client might hurt herself, since those who have the most serious plans
           or are the most depressed or without hope are often the least            
                                                                                    
           communicative. You have to fall back on your own inklings or sense that  
           the client is withdrawn, or angry, or threatening, or despairing to the point
           where it is not even worth talking about. Or you may be alerted by exactly
                                                                                    
           the opposite phenomenon. That is, feelings of serenity or good humor in a
           person who has only recently been very depressed and whose present state 
                                                                                    
           of tranquility may indicate that she has finally made a decision to end her
           life. In all these cases you will seek a second opinion-even if your     
           suspicions are based only on a disquieting hunch.                        
                                                                                    
               When you have done all this, you will have used all your resources,  
           insight, and courage to raise the possibility with your client that she might
           be thinking of taking, or preparing to take her own life. But you must be
                                                                                    
           realistic about your own limitations. If a client wishes to die, she will find a
           way to do so, despite your best efforts.                                 
                                                                                    
               Ultimately, she is the person responsible for preserving-or taking-her
           own life.                                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           A                                                                        
            SSESSING A                                                              
                      C                                                             
                       LIENT FOR                                                    
                                R                                                   
                                  ISK OF                                            
                                       S                                            
                                        UICIDE

=== Page 133 (1 cols) ===
This form begins with questions you should ask yourself in every interview.
           If the answer to some of these is “yes,” then you should follow up with the
           client to find out whether or not the client has any suicidal ideation or
                                                                                    
           intentions.                                                              
                                                                                    
           Questions for yourself                                                   
                                                                                    
           1. Is the client in a group that is statistically at high risk for suicide?
                                                                                    
           2. Has the client unintentionally gained or lost more than 5% of her body
               weight in the last month?                                            
           3. Has the client reported any marked change in sleeping habits?         
                                                                                    
           4. Does the client appear sad or withdrawn?                              
           5. Does the client sound despondent?                                     
                                                                                    
           6. Has anyone else reported that the client is despondent or sounding    
               hopeless?                                                            
           7. Does the client seem extremely angry or hostile?                      
                                                                                    
           8. Does the client report a sudden improvement in mood or lifting of a   
               longstanding depression?                                             
           9. Has the client recently experienced the loss of a significant person in her
                                                                                    
               life through death, divorce, removal, or abandonment?                
           10. Has the client reported any recent suicide among friends or family?  
                                                                                    
           11. Has the client reported any history of suicide in the family?        
           12. If so, does the client’s family talk about the suicide or is it a secret?
           13. Is the client approaching the anniversary of a family member’s suicide?
                                                                                    
           14. Is the client about to be the same age or in similar circumstances as the
               family member who killed him/herself?                                
                                                                                    
           15. Has the client reported to you a previous suicide attempt?           
           16. Has the client made any comments-joking or otherwise-suggesting that 
               death would be preferable to life?                                   
                                                                                    
           17. Has anyone else reported that the client talked about killing herself?
           18. Has anyone found a note, poem, or printed literature involving death or
               suicide that was written by or belongs to the client?                
                                                                                    
           19. Does the client report giving away possessions?                      
           20. Does the client have a history of impulsivity, poor judgment, or     
                                                                                    
               antisocial behavior?

=== Page 134 (1 cols) ===
21. Does the client have a history of recurrent depression, intense anxiety,
               or panic attacks?                                                    
           22. Does the client have a history of a serious mental disorder, especially
                                                                                    
               auditory hallucinations commanding her to hurt herself?              
           23. Does the client have a history of substance abuse?                   
                                                                                    
           24. Is the client frequently involved in “death-defying” or high-risk    
               behavior?                                                            
           25. Does the client frequently pick fights with people who are much larger
                                                                                    
               or more dangerous?                                                   
           26. Is there a current crisis in the client’s life, such as illness, job loss,
                                                                                    
               divorce, school failure, or suspension?                              
                                                                                    
           Questions to ask the client                                              
                                                                                    
           The list begins with general questions designed to establish whether or not a
           client is having suicidal ideation. You may or may not need to use these 
                                                                                    
           questions to establish the existence of that ideation; however, once ideation
           is reported, you should pursue the subsequent information in as much detail
           as possible.                                                             
                                                                                    
           1. You seem upset. Just how badly are you feeling?                       
           2. When you feel badly, do you ever have any thoughts about hurting      
                                                                                    
               yourself?                                                            
           3. Do you ever wish you were dead?                                       
           4. When you wish you were dead, do you ever think about killing yourself?
                                                                                    
               If the answer to these questions is yes:                             
           5. When did you start having these thoughts?                             
                                                                                    
           6. What was happening when you started thinking about hurting yourself?  
           7. How often are you having these thoughts?                              
           8. Are you able to stop these thoughts once you start having them?       
                                                                                    
           9. When you think about killing yourself, do you think a lot about it?   
           10. Do these thoughts upset you or do they make you feel better?         
           11. What do you think would happen if you tried to kill yourself?        
                                                                                    
           12. Who do you think would try to prevent your suicide?                  
           13. Have you told anyone that you’re thinking of killing yourself?       
                                                                                    
           14. What do you imagine death would be like?

=== Page 135 (1 cols) ===
15. When you have thoughts of killing yourself, how do you imagine doing 
               it?                                                                  
           16. When you imagine it, do you complete the suicide? If not, who or what
                                                                                    
               stops you?                                                           
           17. Do you imagine writing a suicide note? Have you actually written a   
                                                                                    
               suicide note?                                                        
           18. Where do you expect to get the [gun, pills, knife, etc.] with which to kill
               yourself?                                                            
                                                                                    
           19. When you feel this way, do you talk to anyone about it?              
           20. Is that person a comfort?                                            
                                                                                    
           21. Is there anyone who is so important to you that that person could keep
               you from hurting yourself?                                           
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 136 (1 cols) ===
ten                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           H                                                                        
              OW      TO                                                            
                            D                                                       
                               ETERMINE                                             
                                                     W                              
                                                         HETHER                     
                                         A                                          
                   C                                                                
                      LIENT                                                         
                                   I                                                
                                    S  A                                            
                                           S                                        
                                             UBSTANCE                               
                                  A                                                 
                                     BUSER                                          
           T                                                                        
             here are very few subjects in the field of mental health about which you
           will find more controversy than the issue of substance abuse. A discussion
           of the reasons why people resort to dangerous or illegal drugs, or why they
           drink, or why they abuse medications given for some other purpose will   
           often produce as many answers as there are participants.                 
               Some will say substance abuse is a disease with identifiable genetic or
           chemical or neurological indicators, and its sufferers should be regarded no
                                                                                    
           differently from anyone else who is suffering from a chronic, debilitating
           illness. Others will point to social ills like poverty and racism as significant
                                                                                    
           causal factors in the use of substances to remediate the painful realities of a
           harsh and innately unfair life. Still others will tell you that drug use is a
           moral flaw that hurts society and-as with other antisocial behaviors-its 
                                                                                    
           perpetrators should be left to the wisdom of the judicial system.        
               Even the definition of a substance abuser is murky. Diagnostic       
           manuals make a distinction between use, abuse, and dependence. Social    
                                                                                    
           observers of one stripe or another describe the sorry state of a society filled
           with crackheads and drunks while they define themselves as “social       
                                                                                    
           drinkers” or their children as “smoking an occasional joint.” Even those 
           who openly acknowledge buying and selling and using substances they      
           know to be both illicit and physiologically harmful will not hesitate to 
                                                                                    
           reassure you-and themselves-that they and their customers do so only     
           “recreationally.”

=== Page 137 (1 cols) ===
Were it possible to agree upon a concise definition of what constitutes
           substance abuse, it would still be close to impossible to get a consensus on
           how to respond therapeutically once you have identified an abuser. One end
                                                                                    
           of the spectrum is represented by those who believe that the best person to
           help an abuser recover is another recovering abuser-hence the various    
                                                                                    
           “twelve-step” programs. Others advocate for individual treatment with a  
           professional trained especially to work with substance abusers. Still others
           suggest that group therapy is the only effective modality, or that any well-
                                                                                    
           trained therapist should be able to work with a substance abuser.        
               Different approaches also prevail as to what aspect of help must come
                                                                                    
           first. For example, yours may be an agency where the belief is that,     
           regardless of the problem with which the client presents himself, if he is
           deemed to also have a drinking or drug problem, that must be the initial 
                                                                                    
           focus of treatment, even if that means a brief hospitalization, or “detox”
           program. Or the substance abuse might be viewed in your clinic as just   
           another self-destructive symptom of an underlying problem that must be   
                                                                                    
           addressed before the abuser can give up his substance.                   
               By now it should be clear that consensus is unlikely on any aspect of
                                                                                    
           the issues involving substance abuse-except one: There is little doubt in
           anyone’s mind that the use and misuse of alcohol and drugs play a        
           significant role in other destructive and self-destructive behaviors. They
                                                                                    
           affect job performance and marital relationships, disease statistics and crime
           statistics. Homicide, suicide, and physical abuse of both adults and children
                                                                                    
           are all correlated with substance abuse in more cases than not. And since
           substance abuse does seem to be a precipitator of other dangerous        
           behaviors, every clinician must learn to think about, and then assess for,
                                                                                    
           possible substance abuse.                                                
               One reason to do so is because this may be the key to preventing some
           of those other dangerous or destructive behaviors. For example, as you   
                                                                                    
           develop a profile of the circumstances under which battering or sexual   
           abuse occur, you may be more alertwhen a client describes his alcohol or 
                                                                                    
           drug use pattern-to the need to carefully monitor the home situation, or to
           help the potential perpetrator to change some behavior, or, if he feels he
           cannot change, to teach him to remove himself temporarily from the setting
                                                                                    
           when he feels he might act impulsively.

=== Page 138 (1 cols) ===
So where do you begin your assessment for possible substance abuse?  
           You can start by looking at the other behaviors in which the client is   
           involved. Examples of that were discussed in Chapters Eight and Nine,    
                                                                                    
           where part of your assessment involved consideration of whether the      
           client’s wish to die or to hurt someone else was being exacerbated by drugs
                                                                                    
           or alcohol.                                                              
               Beyond those two circumstances, the rest of this chapter will be     
           devoted to helping you understand the general areas of assessment you are
                                                                                    
           going to use in evaluating whether or not a client is a substance abuser. At
           the end of this chapter you will find more specific questions to ask of  
                                                                                    
           yourself and the client if any of the information you have garnered in the
           general areas caused you to be concerned. Of course, you will then share 
           those findings with the treatment team in order to decide how next to    
                                                                                    
           intervene.                                                               
               However, before we begin, it is important to add one additional factor
           to the equation of assessing for substance abuse. That is, substance abusers
                                                                                    
           often do not want other people to know about their habit. They may feel  
           ashamed, or know they are involved in illicit behavior that could lead to
                                                                                    
           their arrest, or be denying to themselves the seriousness of their use-or any
           of a dozen other reasons for not bringing the subject up in an interview.
               Therefore, if you don’t ask, the issue may never get raised.         
                                                                                    
           Unfortunately, even if you do ask-and even if you have some information  
           that makes you reasonably certain that a person is a user-he may still deny it
                                                                                    
           when you bring it up. Or, if he does tell you, he may minimize the problem.
           Consequently, understanding the degree to which this person misuses some 
           substance will not be easy. You will have to learn to ask about many     
                                                                                    
           different aspects of the problem in order to get a reasonably accurate picture
           of the degree to which drugs or alcohol play a part in-and interfere with-this
           client’s functioning.                                                    
                                                                                    
               This last idea-that what you are ultimately trying to ascertain is what
           part drugs or alcohol play in a person’s mental, physical, social and    
                                                                                    
           professional life-is what assessment for substance abuse really consists of.
           So begin by raising the topic in the context of one of the routine areas of
           your assessment. For example, if you are taking a brief medical history, you
                                                                                    
           might ask the client if he smokes, and then if he drinks, and then whether or
           not he has ever used any drugs. When talking about his family history, you

=== Page 139 (1 cols) ===
would certainly want to follow up with the client if he indicates that any
           other family member has a substance abuse problem.                       
               The first general area to explore is what substances the client uses.
                                                                                    
           Does he drink beer? Does he smoke marijuana and drink beer? Does he      
           smoke cigarettes and marijuana and drink beer but “never touch hard      
                                                                                    
           liquor”? Does he ever use cocaine or heroin or valium, etc? That “etc.” is an
           important one, because it is shorthand for a very long list of legal and illegal
           substances that can be misused, including some common over-the-counter   
                                                                                    
           medications. In your efforts to inform yourself about substance abuse, you
           should use whatever resources are available to familiarize yourself with the
                                                                                    
           wide variety of substances that might be imbibed, injected, smoked, sniffed,
           or swallowed.                                                            
               Once the client has acknowledged some substance use, explore how     
                                                                                    
           long he used or has been using that substance or substances. For example,
           an alcohol abuser can probably tell you the first time he ever took a drink.
           And a heroin user can almost certainly tell you the first time he ever shot
                                                                                    
           up, and who gave him the heroin. This fact, in and of itself, is an interesting
           and significant one in your assessment-that is, that, especially with alcohol,
                                                                                    
           the first time the substance was encountered seems to stand out in the mind
           of an abuser.                                                            
               However, those reminiscences will not necessarily lead to an         
                                                                                    
           acknowledgment on the client’s part that he is currently a user. So you  
           would next turn to the question of how recently the substance or substances
                                                                                    
           were used. Obviously, the answer, “I’ve been going to AA for 20 years,”  
           has different implications from “I don’t remember” or “Maybe last week”  
           or “This morning.”                                                       
                                                                                    
               This last response raises an interesting dilemma for a clinician, and
           one which you should clarify with your supervisor. Especially if you have
           had limited experience in assessing for symptoms of substance abuse, you 
                                                                                    
           may discover during a session that the client is presently under the     
           influence of drugs or alcohol or both.                                   
                                                                                    
               In such a scenario, the client is probably not so intoxicated as to be
           apparently drunk or high. Even if he were, there is some disagreement in 
           the therapeutic community as to how to handle such a situation. Some say 
                                                                                    
           that you should stop the interview at that point and suggest that the client
           come back when he is sober or not acutely experiencing the effects of the

=== Page 140 (1 cols) ===
drug, since he is not likely to be able to make good use of the session under
           the circumstances. Still others recommend that you try and discuss with the
           client what effect he imagines the intoxication might have on the usefulness
                                                                                    
           of therapy. Then there are those who would suggest that you simply       
           continue the interview and explore, as much as possible, the history of the
                                                                                    
           substance abuse. In any case, talk with your supervisor about what the   
           agency deems an appropriate response and what services you can refer the 
           client to if he is not suitable for your program.                        
                                                                                    
               Presuming that you are going to continue your assessment, the next   
           area to focus on is how much of the substance the client uses. As you will
                                                                                    
           see from the questions at the end of the chapter, you are trying to get a sense
           of the quantity of alcohol consumed, or the amount of marijuana smoked in
           a 24-hour period, or the number of pills taken and their dosage. However,
                                                                                    
           the purpose of these questions is not for you to then be able to determine
           with certainty whether or not the client has a drinking or drug problem, 
           because, unfortunately, making such a determination is not that simple.  
                                                                                    
               Alcohol and drug use have very different meanings in different       
           cultures within our society; in fact, depending on your own cultural and 
                                                                                    
           social background, you may feel frightened by or judgmental about        
           behavior that is outside the context of your own experience of drugs or  
           alcohol. For example, you may feel intensely concerned about an inner-city
                                                                                    
           youngster for whom experimentation with whatever is being sold on his    
           local street corner is considered a rite of passage, or with an employee who
                                                                                    
           works the night shift and tells you that everyone at his job drinks beer from
           the time the boss leaves until the day shift starts. Your concern may be well-
           founded-or it may not-which is why a thorough assessment, as well as the 
                                                                                    
           input of the treatment team is necessary.                                
               Listen, especially as you move into assessing the quantity of the    
           substance used, for two things: First, does the client seem to have used the
                                                                                    
           same quantity of the substance consistently for a long period of time or does
           he continue to increase the amount? If so, by how much has it increased and
                                                                                    
           in what period of time? Second, if he is increasing the amount-regardless of
           whether his friends consider it a rite of passage, or everyone else on his job
           drinks, or whatever other social or cultural attitudes may prevail-does the
                                                                                    
           client himself express any belief or concern or question about the possibility
           that he already has or is developing a drinking or drug problem?

=== Page 141 (1 cols) ===
This question may come up at any point during the interview. If it   
           does, then-as with all other issues that the client experiences as sources of
           concern-you are getting an indication that he wants some help. However, if
                                                                                    
           he does not bring up any worries about it at this point, then continue with
           the next general area of questioning, which is: When does he use?        
                                                                                    
               Here you are listening for an elaboration of the circumstances, or times
           of day, or company in which the client drinks, takes drugs, or medicates 
           himself. It would be reassuring at this point if we could say that a particular
                                                                                    
           pattern indicates with certainty that the client is having a problem.    
           However, regrettably, the nature of the different substances varies, and so
                                                                                    
           does the nature of the definition of a problem.                          
               In fact, the person who drinks a half bottle of wine for dinner by   
           himself every night and has done so for twenty years may be at less risk 
                                                                                    
           than the person who is getting drunk every other weekend with his friends.
           Just as the person who uses cocaine every three months at a party may be at
           less risk than the person who routinely “rolls a couple of joints” for himself
                                                                                    
           as he is driving home from work. Part of the problem-even in citing such 
           examples-is that they arouse social values and judgments which can imply 
                                                                                    
           approval or disapproval of the behavior. It is crucial that you remind   
           yourself that your task is to gather information, so that later you can  
           evaluate all the data and make a useful decision.                        
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                               ASK    YOURSELF                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                What substances does the client use?                                
                How  recently has he used them?                                     
                                                                                    
                How  much does he use?                                              
                When  does he use?                                                  
                Why  does he use?                                                   
                                                                                    
                What happens  when he uses?                                         
                What effect is the substance use having on his life?                
                Has he ever tried to stop using? How did he try? Did it work?

=== Page 142 (1 cols) ===
Implicit in the last question - when he uses - is the potential answer to
           the next question: Why does he use? This is not a question you will ask  
           directly, and the possible answers are legion. Does he use because it makes
                                                                                    
           him feel more comfortable in crowds? Does it ease his chronic physical   
           pain so he can continue to do his job? Does it enable him to perform better
                                                                                    
           sexually? Do all his friends do it? Does he do it to avoid thinking about the
           fact that he is going to be demoted? Or go bankrupt? Or lose his children?
           You may hear many explanations as you explore this area, but you should  
                                                                                    
           not feel surprised if you find no clear, concise answer.                 
               However, as you move onto the next question, the client may be more  
                                                                                    
           helpful. That question is: What happens when he uses? Here you are       
           listening for, and asking about, behavioral or personality changes. For  
           example, does he have blackouts and forget how he got home? Or is he     
                                                                                    
           more at ease at parties? Is this when he hits his children or spouse? Does he
           become more daring in his transactions at work? Does he begin to hear    
           voices or feel like things are crawling on his skin? Does he feel euphoric
                                                                                    
           and believe, for that period of time, that all his troubles are behind him?
               If the latter is the case, what are the troubles to which he is referring,
                                                                                    
           and are they being caused by the substances he is using? In other words: 
           What effect is his substance use having on his life? For example, is his 
           spouse threatening to leave him because of his substance use? Has he been
                                                                                    
           arrested for drunk driving, or selling drugs, or embezzling funds he used to
           pay for a drug habit? Does he tend to socialize only with other users? Are
                                                                                    
           his current physical problems related to his substance use? Is he about to get
           fired from his job because he doesn’t come to work on time, or is        
           unreliable, or doesn’t perform his job as well as he used to?            
                                                                                    
               By now you can no doubt see that there are many steps in assessing   
           whether or not a client might need treatment for a substance abuse problem.
           It is likely, by this point in an interview, that if the client has been willing to
                                                                                    
           answer your questions, he too recognizes that his substance use is having
           quite a serious effect on his life. Regardless of whether or not he      
                                                                                    
           acknowledges that fact, there are three more questions to explore, if    
           possible, before you present your findings to the treatment team. These are:
           Has the client ever tried to stop using? If so, how did he try? And lastly,
                                                                                    
           Did it work?

=== Page 143 (1 cols) ===
When you have the answers to these questions, you will have finished 
           your assessment of the client’s history of substance abuse. This assessment
           should prove invaluable in helping the treatment team to carefully calibrate
                                                                                    
           the level of intervention necessary for this particular client.          
                                                                                    
           A                                                                        
            SSESSMENT FOR                                                           
                         S                                                          
                           UBSTANCE                                                 
                                   A                                                
                                     BUSE                                           
                                         P                                          
                                           OTENTIAL                                 
           It is unlikely that you will ask a client all these questions. However, since it
           is common these days to find multiple substance use and abuse, you will  
           need to tailor your choice of questions to reflect information derived from
           the first six responses.                                                 
           1. Do you-or did you ever-smoke cigarettes? For how long? How many per   
               day?                                                                 
           2. Do you drink?                                                         
           3. What do you drink? (Beer, wine, liquor?)                              
           4. Do you take any prescription medications regularly? How do they make  
               you feel?                                                            
           5. Do you use any over-the-counter medications regularly? How do they    
               make you feel?                                                       
           6. Have you ever used any illegal drug?                                  
           7. When was the last time you had a drink/used?                          
                                                                                    
           8. How much did you have to drink/use?                                   
           9. When was the last time before that?                                   
           10. How much did you have?                                               
                                                                                    
           11. Do you always drink/use approximately the same amount? If not, is the
               amount increasing or decreasing?                                     
                                                                                    
           12. (If it is increasing) does that concern you?                         
           13. Have you ever gained or lost a significant amount of weight when you 
               were drinking/using?                                                 
                                                                                    
           14. Have you ever had difficulty sleeping when you were drinking/using?  
           15. At what time of day do you drink/use?                                
                                                                                    
           16. At what time of the week do you drink/use?                           
           17. How many days a week do you drink/use?                               
           18. Who is usually with you when you drink/use?                          
                                                                                    
           19. Do most of your friends drink/use?                                   
           20. Do (or did) your parents drink/use?

=== Page 144 (1 cols) ===
21. Is there anyone in your family who is an alcoholic/addict?           
           22. Have you ever been concerned that you might have a drinking/drug     
               problem?                                                             
                                                                                    
           23. Has anyone else ever suggested to you that you have (or had) a       
               drinking/drug problem?                                               
                                                                                    
           24. How does drinking/using help you?                                    
           25. When you drink/use, how does it make you feel?                       
           26. Do people ever report behavior to you which you don’t remember doing 
                                                                                    
               while you were under the influence of alcohol or drugs?              
           27. Do other people report that you become more careless, or angry, or out
                                                                                    
               of control when you’ve been drinking/using?                          
           28. Are you able to “handle” more alcohol or drugs than you used to be?  
           29. Are you less able to “handle” alcohol or drugs than you used to be?  
                                                                                    
           30. Do you feel more sociable when you’ve been drinking/using?           
           31. Have you ever had sex with someone with whom you would not have      
               had sex if you weren’t drinking/using?                               
                                                                                    
           32. Do you ever feel regret about any behavior after you’ve been         
               drinking/using?                                                      
                                                                                    
           33. Do you drink/use to “get away from your troubles”?                   
           34. What troubles are you trying to get away from?                       
           35. Has anyone at your job expressed concern about your drinking/using?  
                                                                                    
           36. Are you aware of any way in which drinking/using is interfering with 
               your work?                                                           
                                                                                    
           37. Have you missed any days at work because of drinking/using?          
           38. Have you ever lost a job because of drinking/using?                  
           39. Are you having any difficulties or conflict with your spouse or partner
                                                                                    
               because of drinking/using?                                           
           40. Has your spouse or partner ever threatened to leave you if you didn’t
               stop drinking/using?                                                 
                                                                                    
           41. Has a spouse or partner ever left you because of your drinking/using?
           42. Does drinking or drug use ever interfere with your sexual relationships?
                                                                                    
           43. Have you ever been arrested for the use or sale of drugs or alcohol or
               because of your behavior when under the influence?                   
           44. Do you pay less attention to your family because you are             
                                                                                    
               drinking/using?

=== Page 145 (1 cols) ===
45. Do you avoid your family or friends when you have been               
               drinking/using?                                                      
           46. Have you ever hit your spouse or children when you’ve been           
                                                                                    
               drinking/using?                                                      
           47. Are you having financial difficulties?                               
                                                                                    
           48. Are they related in any way to your drinking/using?                  
           49. Have you ever tried to stop drinking/using? How?                     
           50. Have you ever seen or heard things that weren’t there when you were  
                                                                                    
               drinking/using?                                                      
           51. Have you ever had any form of therapy to help you stop drinking/using?
                                                                                    
           52. Have you ever attended a twelve-step or other support group to help you
               stop drinking/using?                                                 
           53. Have you ever been to a doctor to stop drinking/using?               
                                                                                    
           54. Have you ever been hospitalized for drinking/using? Where? For how   
               long?                                                                
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 146 (1 cols) ===
eleven                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                H                                                                   
                   OW      TO                                                       
                                 A                                                  
                                    SSESS                                           
                                                C                                   
                                                   HILDREN                          
                FOR                                                                 
                         N                                                          
                            EGLECT                                                  
                                           ,  A                                     
                                                 BUSE                               
                                                          ,                         
                                                             AND                    
                           S                                                        
                              EXUAL                                                 
                                            A                                       
                                               BUSE                                 
           O                                                                        
              f all the situations that provoke sadness, fear, or anger in a clinician,
           none is as intense as an adult’s hurting or degrading or molesting a child or
           leaving the child so unprotected that she becomes prey to someone else   
           doing those things. Neglect, abuse, and sexual abuse can be unbearably   
           painful to think about. However, even as we are wishing, hoping, and     
           praying that such things never happen to another child, the law, and society,
           and our own consciences demand that we think about them, learn to        
           recognize the possibility that they might be occurring and, when we have 
           reason to be concerned, inform others about that concern.                
               It is especially important to think about and understand the meaning of
           the word emphasized in the paragraph above: that is, the possibility that
           neglect, abuse, or sexual abuse is taking place. Unless you work in an   
           agency whose mandate is to make a determination about whether such       
           behavior is occurring, your responsibility as a clinician is to raise your
           concerns with the appropriate person or agency and to provide all relevant
           documentation -not to prove that a child is being neglected, abused, or  
           sexually abused.                                                         
               Every state has its own law defining abuse and neglect, and every state
           has a system for reporting them. They also have their own designations of
                                                                                    
           who is required to report. These designations may be based on professional
           training, licensure, job description, etc. Therefore, your first task is to
           clarify whether or not you are a mandated reporter of suspected child    
                                                                                    
           abuse. If you are a mandated reporter, that means there can be legal     
           consequences for you if you do not report suspected abuse or neglect.

=== Page 147 (1 cols) ===
Whether you are a mandated reporter or not, your agency will         
           undoubtedly have guidelines concerning the need to report suspected abuse
           and neglect. Your second task is to familiarize yourself with those      
                                                                                    
           guidelines and to talk with your supervisor about how they are           
           implemented. Ask to see the forms which must be filled out and find out to
                                                                                    
           what agency in your state such reports are made.                         
               It is especially important in cases of suspected abuse or neglect that
           you do everything you possibly can to avoid making a unilateral decision to
                                                                                    
           report. You should use the support and experience of those around you to 
           guide you and to calm the inevitable anxieties that are raised by having to
                                                                                    
           talk with parents or contact a child welfare agency. The obligation to inform
           another agency also carries with it a particularly powerful responsibility to
           be conscientious and deliberate in your information-gathering, since both a
                                                                                    
           child’s safety and the well-being of a family may be at risk.            
               The first purpose of this chapter therefore, is to help you make that
           conscientious and deliberate assessment so that you have garnered as much
                                                                                    
           data as possible for your consultations with more experienced staff      
           members. The second purpose is to provide both the tools and the         
                                                                                    
           confidence so that, should you find yourself in a situation where you    
           believe that a child is at risk and you truly have no one else to advise you,
           you will act without hesitation to protect that child’s safety.          
                                                                                    
               The chapter will clarify the concepts of neglect and abuse and discuss
           some of the ways in which they might become evident in a session. You    
                                                                                    
           will learn what to ask if such information does arise and how to assess the
           imminent risk to the child. In addition, this chapter addresses the three
           critical areas to think about routinely when seeing a child in order to  
                                                                                    
           evaluate the risk that this child is being either neglected or           
           physically/sexually abused. These three areas are: physical symptoms,    
           behavioral signs, and caretaker characteristics.                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                  REMEMBER

=== Page 148 (1 cols) ===
Find out if you are a mandated reporter of child abuse and          
                neglect.                                                            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                       HOW     TO   AVOID     MAKING       A                        
                                                                                    
                 UNILATERAL         DECISION       TO   REPORT                      
                                                                                    
                      CHILD     ABUSE      OR   NEGLECT                             
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            1. Learn your agency’s procedures regarding suspected abuse or          
                                                                                    
                neglect.                                                            
            2. If possible, only schedule first interviews with children when a     
                                                                                    
                senior staff member is at your agency.                              
            3. If # 2 is not possible, see if a rotation of senior workers on call  
                by telephone might be possible.                                     
                                                                                    
            4. If # 3 is not possible, ask for your supervisor’s home telephone     
                number and  for clarification of the circumstances under which      
                you should use it.                                                  
                                                                                    
            5. Ask for your agency director’s home telephone number and for         
                clarification of the circumstances under which you should use       
                                                                                    
                it.                                                                 
            6. When you think a child’s safety is at risk, do not let feelings of   
                embarrassment  or feelings that you “shouldn’t bother her at        
                                                                                    
                home” stand in the way of calling a senior staff member, your       
                supervisor, or the director of your agency.                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               You will find a detailed list of physical symptoms, behavioral signs 
                                                                                    
           and caretaker characteristics at the end of the chapter. The reason for this
           list is not just to provide you with an easy reference but also to remind you
                                                                                    
           that there are many clues to the possibility that a child is being hurt, some
           of which may not in and of themselves seem related to abuse or neglect.  
           Therefore, it is important to familiarize yourself with the possible     
                                                                                    
           combinations of signs, symptoms, and caretaker characteristics which could

=== Page 149 (1 cols) ===
be indicators as well. The list is also intended to help you avoid jumping to
           conclusions. Especially when you are feeling anxious, you must resist the
           tendency to rush rather than soliciting all the information needed to make a
                                                                                    
           conscientious decision.                                                  
               So, keeping all those aspects in mind, let us first begin with a     
                                                                                    
           preliminary demarcation between neglect and abuse, bearing in mind,      
           however, that definitions and language also vary from state to state. What is
           described here as neglect may be referred to in your laws as maltreatment or
                                                                                    
           abuse; physical abuse may be called excessive corporal punishment.       
           Broadly speaking, however, neglect can be defined as the parent or legally
                                                                                    
           designated caretaker not doing something for the child that should have  
           been done, whereas abuse can be conceptualized as the parent or legally  
           designated caretaker doing something to the child that should not have been
                                                                                    
           done.                                                                    
               It is perhaps confusing to note that both of these definitions involve
           action or inaction only by the parent or legally designated caretaker, since it
                                                                                    
           is certainly true that someone other than a parent or caretaker might hurt a
           child and that you might become aware of such an incident and correctly  
                                                                                    
           assess that you have a responsibility to inform the appropriate agency.  
               For example, a man might physically or sexually abuse his girlfriend’s
           child. Depending on the laws in your state and the nature of his action  
                                                                                    
           against the child, his behavior might be deemed by the courts to be assault,
           rape, sodomy, or some other charge. On the other hand, the mother who for
                                                                                    
           whatever reason left her child unprotected from harm might be deemed     
           neglectful because, as stated above, neglect implies the absence of some 
           action that the parent should have taken, and it invariably arises out of
                                                                                    
           inertia or a lack of something in caring for a child.                    
               This lack manifests itself in five different identifiable forms of neglect,
           the first and seemingly most apparent of which is physical neglect. The  
                                                                                    
           operative word here (as it is with all five types of neglect) is seemingly,
           because trying to assess whether or not a situation is potentially neglectful
                                                                                    
           can sometimes bring into play significant cultural and social differences,
           which can cloud one’s judgment in making a sound assessment. For         
           example, if an infant was brought to your office who was dirty, or dressed
                                                                                    
           in ragged or seasonally inappropriate clothing, or was unwashed, you might
           be repelled, angry, or convinced she was neglected. However, if the child

=== Page 150 (1 cols) ===
were 12, her appearance might have a different meaning-just as it might if
           the family were newly arrived from a very different culture, or homeless, or
           of a particular religious persuasion, or refugees, or even just returned from a
                                                                                    
           camping trip.                                                            
               Therefore, in your assessment of any type of prospective neglect, it is
                                                                                    
           important to ask yourself two questions: First, is the condition in which you
           find the child one which appears to have been going on over a period of  
           time? In other words, do you have some information to suggest that this is
                                                                                    
           the typical level of caretaking this child receives? Second, might it be 
           endangering the health or safety of the child? If the answer is yes to either
                                                                                    
           question, then you can feel more confident that what you are observing,  
           hearing about, or feeling anxious about requires further evaluation.     
               Let us now return to the definition of physical neglect, since it involves
                                                                                    
           more than assessing a child’s appearance. Broadly speaking, physical     
           neglect not only refers to inappropriate or insufficient clothing but can also
           be used to describe a situation involving inadequate shelter, sanitation, or
                                                                                    
           food. Given the parameters described above-that is, length of time and risk
           to the child’s health or safety-it should not be terribly difficult to know if
                                                                                    
           the child’s well-being is at risk.                                       
               If you feel concerned but aren’t sure, then ask-not in an accusatory or
           inquisitorial way but in a way that transmits your concern both for the  
                                                                                    
           parent’s wish to be a good parent and for the child’s well-being. Ask the
           child or ask the parent, depending on which seems most appropriate and   
                                                                                    
           likely to give you the clearest sense of what is happening to the child. Ask
           when the child last ate, or had a bath, or had clean clothes. Ask where she
           lives and how many people live with her. Ask if she has a room. If not, ask
                                                                                    
           if she has a bed, and if she does, how many people sleep in it. Ask what she
           had for breakfast, or who fed her. And, if the answers seem crucial, write
           them down.                                                               
                                                                                    
               The second kind of neglect about which you must be concerned is      
           often directly related to the first-that is medical neglect. The most    
                                                                                    
           straightforward example of this would be a child who is not getting enough
           to eat and is suffering from malnutrition, but there are many other examples
           as well, for instance: giving a child some dangerously inappropriate     
                                                                                    
           medication or remedy for a condition or illness; or not taking her for regular
           medical follow-up of a potentially serious condition; or any other absence

=== Page 151 (1 cols) ===
of the provision of medical treatment without which the child might die or
           lose some essential bodily function.                                     
               The third area of concern is educational neglect, which means, quite 
                                                                                    
           simply, that the child is not going to school or being educated by some  
           acceptable alternative system for reasons having to do with the need or  
                                                                                    
           condition of the caretaker, not of the child. For example, an alcoholic or
           depressed parent may be up all night and sleep during the day, making it 
           impossible for the child to be brought to school on any consistent basis. Or
                                                                                    
           a parent may routinely keep an older child at home as caretaker for a    
           preschooler or an ill sibling.                                           
                                                                                    
               Fourth is the neglect arising out of inadequate supervision. This refers
           to leaving a child alone or untended at an inappropriate age; exposing a 
           child to dangerous circumstances, such as a surrogate caretaker who is   
                                                                                    
           mentally or physically unfit to protect the child; placing a child in situations
           where she may see or hear or participate in activities that are unsuitable,
           such as pornography or prostitution or the use of drugs; or simply the   
                                                                                    
           abandoning of a child.                                                   
               Lastly, there is emotional neglect, in which a parent scapegoats a child,
                                                                                    
           isolates the child from human contact for long periods of time, or humiliates
           the child. In addition, a parent might constantly threaten the child with dire
           consequences, subject her to some other form of mental duress, or just   
                                                                                    
           ignore her for long periods of time.                                     
               Those are the five ways that neglect can manifest itself and some    
                                                                                    
           examples of each. As you have no doubt realized by now, potentially      
           neglectful situations can sometimes be precipitated by events over which 
           the caretaker may have very little control. That reality poses a particularly
                                                                                    
           thorny problem for the clinician.                                        
               In fact, homelessness, substance abuse, a death in the family, a job 
           loss, mental illness or retardation, or many other circumstances may explain
                                                                                    
           why a child is not being cared for properly. And all those extenuating   
           circumstances may contribute to feelings of guilt and confusion on your  
                                                                                    
           part about whether or not you have the right to add to this parent’s burden
           by raising issues about a child’s well-being. This is one of the reasons why
           it is especially important for you to share the information you have with
                                                                                    
           your supervisor and the treatment team as early as possible, so that you will
           have their guidance in deciding what you must do to protect the child.

=== Page 152 (1 cols) ===
This is, of course, equally true in cases of possible physical abuse,
           which can be defined as an intentional rather than accidental causing of 
           injury to a child. These injuries may include bruises, burns or bites,   
                                                                                    
           beatings, stabbings, broken limbs, or many other forms of physical injury.
           The injury itself may be apparent when you see a child, or it may be hidden.
                                                                                    
           It may have been the result of one incident or an ongoing series of assaults.
           It may have happened yesterday or last month or last year.               
               You are going to have to tailor your inquiry about possible abuse    
                                                                                    
           according to many factors. For example, one child may be of an age where 
           she can easily describe what has happened; another child’s experience may
                                                                                    
           emerge only as she plays with dolls or does a drawing. One child may tell
           you she is “accident prone,” while another explains that she always wears
           long sleeves on Mondays because she stays at her father’s house on the   
                                                                                    
           weekends.                                                                
               And every child will have a very different understanding of the      
           implications of what is happening to her. One might readily volunteer    
                                                                                    
           information about injuries and why, how, and under what circumstances her
           parent or parents punish her. Another might tell you what happened but just
                                                                                    
           as quickly explain that it happened because she was bad, or didn’t listen, or
           ate too much popcorn. Others may be suspicious, or guarded, or make up   
           incongruous explanations for marks or bruises that you can see, or deny that
                                                                                    
           they have any marks on their body that can’t be seen, or simply become   
           visibly frightened, silent, or tearful.                                  
                                                                                    
               Just as you must learn to appreciate the myriad ways in which children
           will inform you that they are being physically abused, so, too, there is a
           wide range of knowledge and opinion among parents of what constitutes    
                                                                                    
           abusive behavior toward a child. These views can vary enormously         
           according to cultural and ethnic values in the community. For example,   
           what may appear to be excessive physical punishment of a child may be    
                                                                                    
           seen by the parent, as well as many in the subculture of that parent, as 
           appropriate discipline, without which the child would become unruly or   
                                                                                    
           disrespectful. And that parent may be completely unaware that such       
           discipline might constitute child abuse in the broader culture.          
               At the other end of that spectrum are parents who are very much aware
                                                                                    
           of what the law considers abusive behavior, or who have warned their child
           to lie about marks or injuries or suffer further punishment, and who know

=== Page 153 (1 cols) ===
how and where on a child’s body to inflict injury where it is least likely to
           be observed. In addition, parents may have had previous reports of       
           suspected child abuse made against them; they may even have had this or  
                                                                                    
           some other child removed from the family after a previous finding of abuse
           by an agency designated to protect children.                             
                                                                                    
               Given this wide range of understanding on the part of parents of the 
           meaning of their actions and your understanding of your responsibility to
           protect a child, you must use common sense while you are conducting an   
                                                                                    
           interview. Ask yourself how you can best acquire the information you need
           to be certain the child is safe, while making certain you are not doing  
                                                                                    
           anything that might further endanger a child about whom you may already  
           have concerns.                                                           
               Common  sense and tact are equally necessary when assessing a child  
                                                                                    
           for possible sexual abuse, which, simply defined, refers to any use of a 
           child for a sexual purpose. That purpose can range from fondling to oral,
           anal, or genital intercourse. It may have occurred once or many times. It can
                                                                                    
           be perpetrated by a man or a woman. It can be perpetrated against a male 
           child or a female child. The child can be 15 days old or 15 months old or 15
                                                                                    
           years old.                                                               
               Regardless of the nature of the sexual interaction, the age of the child,
           the gender of the perpetrator, or the number of times the abuse took place,
                                                                                    
           there are two essential facts about sexual abuse of children to keep in mind:
           First, sexual abuse of children occurs in every race, ethnic group, and  
                                                                                    
           economic class in society. In other words, anyone can sexually abuse a   
           child. Second, the perpetrator is most likely to be someone the child knows-
           either a family member or a friend who is trusted enough to have access to
                                                                                    
           the child.                                                               
               Depending partly on a child’s age and partly on the manner in which  
           the perpetrator has involved the child in the abuse (that is, threateningly or
                                                                                    
           seductively), the child may reveal the fact that she is being sexually abused
           in various ways. For example, a young child may say something quite      
                                                                                    
           straightforward, like “Uncle Bobby put his pee-pee in me and it hurt,” or
           play with two dolls in an overtly sexualized way and, when asked what the
           dolls are doing, simply tell you that they are “doing the thing like my  
                                                                                    
           babysitter does to me.”

=== Page 154 (1 cols) ===
However, it is more likely, especially as children who are being     
           sexually abused get older and the implication of what is happening to them
           become clearer, that they will experience shame and intense fear: fear of
                                                                                    
           humiliation if the abuse is revealed; fear of being injured or killed; fear that
           they will be accused of betraying a loved one; fear of hurting a parent  
                                                                                    
           whom they believe is unaware of the abuse; fear of destroying the family.
           From the clinician’s point of view the sum of all those fears is that in most
           cases it is extremely painful, even terrifying, for a child to reveal that she is
                                                                                    
           being sexually abused.                                                   
               All of the reasons to “keep the secret” can powerfully conspire against
                                                                                    
           your asking the child-but you have to learn to ask anyway. If a child seems
           to know a lot more about sexual matters than makes sense for a child her 
           age, then you need to ask in some simple, straightforward way, in language
                                                                                    
           she can understand, where she learned all about that. If a child tells you that
           she doesn’t like the way her babysitter touches her, then ask her to show
           you with two dolls how her babysitter touches her, or to point to the places
                                                                                    
           on her body where the babysitter touches her. If an adolescent tells you that
           her mother’s boyfriend is weird or her mother ought to get rid of the creep,
                                                                                    
           you can ask what he says or does that makes her uncomfortable.           
               There are many ways to ask and, as you can see from the list at the end
           of the chapter, many indications of when it might be prudent to do so. So
                                                                                    
           the question then becomes: If you ask a child about sexual abuse-or      
           physical abuse-and she indicates that it is occurring, what do you do next?
                                                                                    
               The answer is that you try, without putting words in the child’s mouth,
           to get some basic data, and you write it down. What is the name of the   
           person who touched her or hurt her? Does that person live with the child? Is
                                                                                    
           that person at home right now? When did, or does, the abuse occur? (For  
           example, at night, or when mommy is at work.) Where did the abuse take   
           place? (For example, in my cousin’s bed, or at my big sister’s house.) What
                                                                                    
           did the person hurt the child with? (For example, his fist, his mouth, an
           iron, a belt.) How many times has the abuse taken place? What was the most
                                                                                    
           recent occurrence, including the date and approximate time of day, if the
           child can tell you? Where on the child’s body was she hurt or touched? (The
           child can point to the places on her body and/or show you what she did to
                                                                                    
           protect herself.) Does the child have any marks or places that hurt right
           now? And lastly, whom has the child told?

=== Page 155 (1 cols) ===
HOW     TO   REPORT       SUSPECTED         ABUSE                    
                                                                                    
                                 OR   NEGLECT                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
            1. Read over your notes from the session and underline or extract       
                                                                                    
                the material you need to report.                                    
            2. Some states have special telephone numbers to be used by             
                mandated  reporters. Make sure you call the right number.           
                                                                                    
            3. Identify yourself by name and, if you are a mandated reporter,       
                say so.                                                             
                                                                                    
            4. Identify your agency by name, address and telephone number.          
            5. Be prepared to give the following facts, if possible:                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
              (a) the child’s name, age and date of birth                           
              (b) the parents’ names                                                
              (c) the names and ages of other children living in the                
                                                                                    
                  household                                                         
              (d) the name of anyone else living in the household                   
              (e) the address and telephone number where the child who is           
                                                                                    
                  the alleged victim lives                                          
              (f) the parents’ telephone numbers at work                            
                                                                                    
              (g) the name of the alleged perpetrator                               
              (h) the alleged perpetrator’s relationship to the child               
              (i) the time and date when the alleged incident(s) occurred.          
                                                                                    
              (j) the place at which the alleged incident(s) occurred               
              (k) a description of the alleged incident(s) as the child             
                                                                                    
                  described them: e.g., the child reported that her father hit      
                  her approximately 10 times with an extension cord on the          
                  backs of her legs and on her face.                                
                                                                                    
              (1) a description of any corroborating information: e.g., the         
                  child had seven thin red welts on the back of her knees           
                  and two marks on her right cheek.                                 
                                                                                    
              (m) some description, if the child told you, of what precipitated     
                  the incident: e.g., the child got a poor report card.

=== Page 156 (1 cols) ===
6. Ask the person who is taking the report for his/her name.            
            7. Ask for the number which is being assigned to the report.            
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               When you have that information, and while the child is still with you,
                                                                                    
           inform your supervisor or some other member of the treatment team, so that
           the two of you can evaluate the information the child has given you. Based
           on that information, you and your supervisor together will do an imminent
                                                                                    
           risk assessment before making a decision as to what to do next. That     
           assessment will consist of evaluating a number of factors:               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
             1. The recentness and nature of the abuse.                             
             2. The age of the child and, therefore, the degree of dependency on an 
                                                                                    
                 adult for protection.                                              
             3. The ease of access the alleged perpetrator has to the child.        
             4. The need of the child for immediate medical care or evaluation.     
                                                                                    
             5. The capacity and reliability of the person who is responsible for   
                 protecting the child.                                              
             6. Any known previous history of abuse or neglect of this or some      
                                                                                    
                 other child in the family.                                         
                                                                                    
               Based on your joint evaluation of these factors, a decision will then be
                                                                                    
           made as to how best to proceed in order to protect this child, including 
           making a report to a child protection agency if that is necessary. When that
                                                                                    
           is completed, next make sure you have met whatever obligations your      
           agency has for documenting such an event and fulfill any tasks you are   
           required by law to perform. When you have done all those things, you     
                                                                                    
           should feel reassured and satisfied that you have done everything you can to
           ensure that the child is safe.                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           P                                                                        
            HYSICAL                                                                 
                   S                                                                
                     IGNS OF                                                        
                           N                                                        
                             EGLECT                                                 
           Physical signs of neglect are observable. A child may look:              
               Dirty or dressed inappropriately                                     
               Listless or tired                                                    
               In need of dental care, glasses, or medical treatment

=== Page 157 (1 cols) ===
As if development, including speech, is delayed                      
                                                                                    
           B                                                                        
            EHAVIORAL                                                               
                      S                                                             
                       YMPTOMS OF                                                   
                                  N                                                 
                                    EGLECT                                          
           A child may report that she:                                             
               Is hungry                                                            
               Steals food for herself or other children                            
               Has never been to school or skips school                             
               Has no one to care for her at home                                   
               Cannot stay awake                                                    
                                                                                    
           M                                                                        
             OST                                                                    
                F                                                                   
                 REQUENT                                                            
                          C                                                         
                           HARACTERISTICS OF                                        
                                            N                                       
                                              EGLECTFUL                             
                                                        C                           
                                                         ARETAKERS                  
               The home is chaotic or disorganized.                                 
               The caretaker is a substance abuser.                                 
               The caretaker is socially isolated and lacks friends or family as sources
               of support.                                                          
               The caretaker demonstrates lack of interest or involvement in the    
               child’s hygiene, or safety, or emotional needs.                      
               The caretaker demonstrates a lack of interest or involvement in the  
               child’s medical needs.                                               
               The caretaker exhibits a critical or demeaning attitude toward the   
               child.                                                               
               The caretaker has a tendency to frighten or humiliate the child.     
               The caretaker has a tendency to isolate the child from social or     
               emotional nurturance.                                                
           S                                                                        
            IGNS OF                                                                 
                   P                                                                
                    HYSICAL                                                         
                           A                                                        
                             BUSE                                                   
           Signs of physical abuse may not always be observable. They may be on     
           parts of the child’s body which are not readily seen. Pay particular attention
           to injuries that seem incongruent with the description of how the child got
           them.                                                                    
               Burns, especially matching burns on both ankles or hands that suggest
               the child may have been immersed in hot liquid; cigarette burns; burns

=== Page 158 (1 cols) ===
in the shape of objects, such as steam irons or curling irons.       
               Bruises and welts, especially on both sides of the face or body, since
               accidental injuries rarely leave symmetrical marks; bruises that suggest
                                                                                    
               that a child has been grabbed with two hands; patterned bruises which
               indicate the shape of an object such as a belt buckle, hairbrush or  
               extension cord.                                                      
                                                                                    
               (Bruises do not always look “black and blue.” On darker skin they may
               look more like blotches, or shiny, or have a purplish cast. Bruises on
               lighter skin will appear purplish or yellow in successive stages of  
                                                                                    
               healing.)                                                            
               Bites                                                                
               Broken bones                                                         
                                                                                    
               Injuries to the head or eyes                                         
                                                                                    
           B                                                                        
            EHAVIORAL                                                               
                      S                                                             
                       YMPTOMS OF                                                   
                                  P                                                 
                                   HYSICAL                                          
                                           A                                        
                                             BUSE                                   
               The child is socially withdrawn.                                     
               The child has frequent fights with other children.                   
               The child is unusually passive or compliant.                         
               The child exhibits concern or anxiety when other children get hurt.  
               The child is fearful or guarded when her parents are present.        
               The child is fearful or guarded around other adults.                 
               The child is fearful of going home.                                  
               The child covers injuries with clothing or makeup.                   
               The child has repeated accidents.                                    
               The child engages in self-mutilating or self-destructive behavior.   
               The child runs away.                                                 
               The child makes a suicide attempt.                                   
               There are reports from teachers of frequent crying or of learning    
               difficulties in which an identifiable learning problem has been ruled
               out.                                                                 
                                                                                    
           M                                                                        
             OST                                                                    
                F                                                                   
                 REQUENT                                                            
                          C                                                         
                           HARACTERISTICS OF                                        
                                            A                                       
                                              BUSIVE                                
                                                    C                               
                                                     ARETAKERS                      
               The caretaker perceives the child as being responsible for the       
               caretaker’s well-being.                                              
               The caretaker has unreasonable expectations of the child’s capacities.

=== Page 159 (1 cols) ===
The caretaker uses forms of discipline which do not match the child’s
               age or the child’s behavior.                                         
               The child is described consistently as “bad,” “irresponsible,” or    
                                                                                    
               “different” from other children.                                     
               The caretaker is a substance abuser.                                 
               The caretaker was abused as a child.                                 
                                                                                    
               The caretaker is socially isolated from friends, family, and community
               resources.                                                           
               The caretaker sees him/herself as unable to “keep control.”          
                                                                                    
               The caretaker is in crisis due to the loss of a loved one, possible  
               incarceration, job loss, etc.                                        
               The caretaker is mentally ill.                                       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           P                                                                        
            HYSICAL                                                                 
                   S                                                                
                     IGNS OF                                                        
                           S                                                        
                             EXUAL                                                  
                                   A                                                
                                    BUSE                                            
               Bed-wetting                                                          
               Indications or reports of pain, bruises, bleeding, or recurrent infections
               in the genitals or rectum, or recurrent urinary infections           
               Indications or reports of pain, bruises, bleeding, or recurrent infections
               in the mouth                                                         
               Venereal disease in mouth, genitals, or rectum                       
               Sexually transmitted diseases in children who would not be expected  
               to be sexually active                                                
               Pre-teen or early teen pregnancy                                     
               Recurrent vomiting or stomachaches                                   
           B                                                                        
            EHAVIORAL                                                               
                      S                                                             
                       YMPTOMS OF                                                   
                                  S                                                 
                                   EXUAL                                            
                                         A                                          
                                           BUSE                                     
               The child is hypervigilant.                                          
               The child has sleep disturbances.                                    
               The child reports fear of a particular person or place.              
               The child is preoccupied with her own or other children’s genitals.  
               The child attempts sexual interactions with other children.          
               The child is unusually mature, knowledgeable or seductive sexually.  
               The child exhibits sudden social withdrawal.                         
               The child is fearful or unwilling to expose her body in normal       
               situations (e.g., changing into a bathing-suit or during a routine

=== Page 160 (1 cols) ===
medical examination).                                                
               The child exhibits infantile behavior or excessive withdrawal into   
               fantasy.                                                             
                                                                                    
               The child reports having no friends.                                 
               The child exhibits oversexualized or seductive behavior with a       
               caretaker.                                                           
                                                                                    
               The child becomes involved in antisocial behavior, e.g., truancy,    
               delinquency, running away, substance abuse, prostitution, or other   
               sexual promiscuity.                                                  
                                                                                    
               The child engages in self-mutiliating behavior or suicide attempts.  
                                                                                    
           M                                                                        
             OST                                                                    
                F                                                                   
                 REQUENT                                                            
                          C                                                         
                           HARACTERISTICS OF                                        
                                            S                                       
                                             EXUALLY                                
                                                     A                              
                                                       BUSIVE                       
                                                             C                      
                                                               ARETAKERS            
           All characteristics described as common in a family where physical abuse 
           or neglect occurs would also apply in a family where a child is being    
           sexually abused. In addition, the following characteristics are common.  
               One caretaker who is passive and dependent, and one who is           
               authoritarian                                                        
               A caretaker who is overly protective of a child                      
               A caretaker who is jealous of the child making an attachment to      
               another person                                                       
               A caretaker who seems inappropriately seductive or who touches the   
               child in what seem to be inappropriate ways                          
               One or both caretakers have experienced a history of physical or     
               sexual abuse                                                         
               Marital or sexual conflict between caretakers                        
               Encouragement by a caretaker of the child’s observing or participating
               in sexual acts with others, or in pornography or prostitution        
               A caretaker who is physically or mentally ill                        
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 161 (1 cols) ===
twelve                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                   W                                                                
                       HAT                                                          
                                P                                                   
                                  SYCHOLOGICAL                                      
                                  T                                                 
                                    ESTING                                          
                 I                                                                  
                  S  AND                                                            
                               W                                                    
                                   HEN                                              
                                            Y                                       
                                               OU                                   
                                                      M                             
                                                          IGHT                      
                               A                                                    
                                  SK    FOR                                         
                                                 I                                  
                                                   T                                
           T                                                                        
             hroughout this book there have been frequent references to the treatment
           team, as well as recommendations that you make use of the other members  
           as a resource for information, decisionmaking, validation, and reassurance
           as you proceed with your assessment. Depending on the nature of your     
           workplace, the treatment team may or may not include a psychologist      
           trained to administer psychological testing. Nevertheless, there may be  
           situations when you and your supervisor decide that psychological testing
           might be helpful, and there certainly will be times when you will receive
           the results of psychological testing done in some other agency, such as a
           school or hospital.                                                      
               If you have never before seen a psychological testing report, you may
           be completely bewildered by what you are reading. This chapter presents  
           some basic information about the content and purpose of psychological    
           testing, describes some circumstances under which you and your supervisor
           might consider that psychological testing be done as part of a client’s  
                                                                                    
           assessment, and discusses how to talk to a client about the purpose of and
           process of psychological testing.                                        
                                                                                    
               So let us begin with some basic facts about psychological testing.   
               First, although it may be administered for different reasons,        
           psychological testing can be used for evaluating clients from preschool age
                                                                                    
           to old age.

=== Page 162 (1 cols) ===
Second, psychological tests are useful, in part, because they are    
           standardized. That is, although some of the tests are designed to assess 
           children, and others are designed for adults, those that are designed for
                                                                                    
           children are given in an identical fashion, with the same questions, and in
           the same order to every child. And those tests that are given to adults are
                                                                                    
           given in exactly the same way to every adult. This means that an         
           experienced psychologist interpreting the testing has the benefit of a body
           of preexisting data and experiential knowledge of how other children or  
                                                                                    
           adults have performed on exactly the same test, administered in exactly the
           same way.                                                                
                                                                                    
               Third, because the tests are standardized, the results offer the tester a
           view of the client which is based less on the client’s ability or wish to
           present a certain impression of himself to others, and more on an        
                                                                                    
           assessment of the client’s characteristic personality style, his thinking
           patterns, and his intellectual functioning. However, it is important to note
           that, particularly in this last aspect-intellectual functioning-there has been
                                                                                    
           evidence that test scores can sometimes be disrupted by factors such as  
           depression and anxiety, distractibility, and even by cultural bias in some of
                                                                                    
           the tests themselves.                                                    
               If you request psychological testing or receive such a report from some
           other agency, what is it likely to look like? First, unless it is a summary of
                                                                                    
           the psychologist’s findings, a report of psychological testing will usually
           start off by indicating the name and age of the client, and the date or dates
                                                                                    
           on which the testing occurred. This may sound pro forma, but it is, in fact,
           important to note the dates of testing because certain tests cannot be   
           considered reliable if they are repeated more often than every two years.
                                                                                    
           The reason is that the client may give answers based on his memory of the
           previous testing, rather than because that is his characteristic level, or style,
           of response. If you are debating whether to test a client who has been tested
                                                                                    
           in the past, this could be a factor in your decision-making.             
               Next, the report will generally give a list of the tests that were   
                                                                                    
           administered to the client. This will almost certainly include and usually
           begin with the current version of those tests intended to evaluate intellectual
           and cognitive functioning, such as the Stanford-Binet test or one of the 
                                                                                    
           Wechsler series. The latter includes the Wechsler Preschool and Primary  
           Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI), for use with young children up to age six;

=== Page 163 (1 cols) ===
the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC) for children up to age
           16; and the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) for use with adults.
               All three of the Wechsler tests have a series of subtests that evaluate
                                                                                    
           intellectual and cognitive functioning in both verbal and nonverbal areas.
           These verbal and performance subtests are intended to measure ways in    
                                                                                    
           which different aspects of intelligence are demonstrated. How the results of
           these tests are described in the report will be discussed shortly.       
               Another series of tests that will often be listed are those which focus
                                                                                    
           on the client’s psychological and emotional functioning. This is typically
           accomplished in one of two ways: either by using standardized checklists 
                                                                                    
           that elucidate patterns of behavior through observation of the client; or by
           administering projective tests. Since the use of checklists to report    
           behavioral observations is straightforward, we will focus here on how    
                                                                                    
           projective testing is used.                                              
               The most commonly used projective tests are the Rorschach and the    
           Thematic Apperception Test (or TAT). The Rorschach is a series of        
                                                                                    
           symmetrical ink blots, some in black and white, some including colors. The
           TAT is a series of pictures of people in ambiguous situations that have some
                                                                                    
           emotional content. These tests are referred to as projective tests because
           they present the client with a series of images or situations that could be
           seen as representing many different things or having many different      
                                                                                    
           meanings and it is left to the client to “project” his own personal meaning
           onto them.                                                               
                                                                                    
               The purpose of these tests is to get a sense of the client’s inner world;
           that is accomplished by the tester asking the client to describe what he sees
           in the ink blots or, in the case of the TATs, to tell a story about what he
                                                                                    
           thinks is happening in the picture. And since the ink blots and pictures are
           so vague, the client must draw on his experience of the world, his       
           understanding of reality, his relationships with others, and his own unique
                                                                                    
           hopes and dreams and disappointments.                                    
               However, it is important to note that, since the responses to the    
                                                                                    
           Rorschach and TAT vary more than those on the intelligence tests or the  
           behavioral checklists, the interpretation of those responses is necessarily
           less standardized. Therefore, the experience and skill of the tester become
                                                                                    
           more significant factors in the quality and reliability of the findings on
           projective tests.

=== Page 164 (1 cols) ===
Finally, there is often an additional group of tests listed which may
           have been administered in response to concerns raised in the original    
           referral for testing, or because the psychologist routinely uses those tests
                                                                                    
           and finds them helpful in the evaluation process, or because some questions
           raised by the intelligence tests required further exploration. There are too
                                                                                    
           many such tests to list here, but their purpose can range from assessing 
           developmental levels or nonverbal problem-solving skills to evaluating   
           school achievement or identifying gross neurological problems.           
                                                                                    
               Once the list of tests administered has been presented, the next section
           of the report will usually be a brief description of why testing was     
                                                                                    
           indicated. For example, it may say something such as: “Billy Doe was     
           referred for testing by his teacher, at the request of his parent, because he is
           currently failing English and Science, and because his teachers report that
                                                                                    
           he is inattentive or disruptive in his classes.” Or, “Ms. Travers was referred
           for testing by her neurologist, Dr. John Smithers, because, following a fire
           in a chemical plant in which she worked and suffered smoke inhalation, Ms.
                                                                                    
           Travers began to report fainting spells, difficulty in distinguishing left and
           right, and lapses of memory.”                                            
                                                                                    
               Following that description it is not unusual to find a brief history of the
           significant psychological events in the client’s life and a brief narrative of
           his development and family background. This should be compared to your   
                                                                                    
           own findings, especially since your source of information about the client
           might not be the same person with whom the psychologist spoke. This is a 
                                                                                    
           useful way both to verify information you have about the client and to be
           alerted to discrepancies.                                                
               Next, the tester will usually devote a section to observations about the
                                                                                    
           client during the testing. The purpose of this section is to present the tester’s
           impressions of this client’s behavior, his style of interacting, and his 
           characteristic modes of problemsolving, involvement in tasks, frustration
                                                                                    
           tolerance, and feelings of competence. Especially with a child, this     
           description will help you to imagine how he behaves in other situations  
                                                                                    
           which require him to concentrate or work at a task.                      
               Next, the report will focus on test results, usually beginning with the
           results of the Verbal Intelligence Quotient (I.Q.) subtest, then the     
                                                                                    
           Performance I.Q. subtest, and then a full-scale I.Q. score that puts the 
           client’s intellectual functioning into a framework compared with other

=== Page 165 (1 cols) ===
children or adults of his age. For example, “Ms. Travers demonstrated a  
           verbal I.Q. of 104, a Performance I.Q. of 105, and a full-scale I.Q. of 103.”
               Regardless of which I.Q. test is used (e.g., WISC, Stanford-Binet),  
                                                                                    
           levels of intellectual functioning are always indicated by a range of scores.
           Thus a full-scale I.Q. of 69 or below on the WAIS, WISC, or WPPSI is     
                                                                                    
           classified as mentally deficient; 70-79 is considered borderline intelligence;
           80-89 is low average; 90-109 is average; 110-119 is high average; 120-129
           is superior; and above 130 is very superior. Other intelligence tests may use
                                                                                    
           other ranges, however, so it is important not to assume that all of them 
           consider 100 to be the midpoint, or average I.Q., as the Wechsler tests do.
                                                                                    
               Following the full-scale I.Q. score, the tester will usually comment on
           the numerical difference between the verbal and performance I.Q.s, if there
           is one, and make a special note if those numbers are more than 15 digits 
                                                                                    
           apart (for example, a Verbal I.Q. of 117 and a Performance I.Q. of 98). If
           there is more than a 15-point differential and the client’s full-scale I.Q. is in
           the average range or higher (that is 90 or above), then the tester is alerted to
                                                                                    
           the possibility that the discrepancy indicates a learning disability which will
           require further evaluation.                                              
                                                                                    
               The next section of the results will be devoted to a description of  
           significant findings revealed by the testing. These findings might include an
           elaboration on the nature of the learning disability the tester suspects, or it
                                                                                    
           might focus on some other aspect of learning style or cognitive functioning.
           Or it might describe the most salient aspects of the client’s inner life and his
                                                                                    
           perceptions of himself and the world. When a complete battery of tests is
           administered, it is likely that all these aspects of the client’s functioning will
           be touched on. In addition, this section of the report should tell you whether
                                                                                    
           or not the psychologist believes that these test results are an accurate 
           reflection of this client’s true capacities. If this information is not in the
           report, you should ask the tester that question if you possibly can.     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                  REMEMBER

=== Page 166 (1 cols) ===
Always ask the tester if she believes the report reflects your      
                client’s true capacities.                                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Finally, there will be a section in which the psychologist makes     
                                                                                    
           recommendations based on her assessment of the client’s functioning as   
           revealed on these standardized tests. These recommendations can include  
           anything from tutoring designed to remediate a specific learning problem to
                                                                                    
           placing a client in a day psychiatric hospital where he can get more     
           intensive services and observation than your facility can offer. They might
                                                                                    
           suggest that a client pursue a particular career choice or be moved to a 
           school setting better suited to his level of intellectual functioning. They
           might include a recommendation that the client be tested again after some
                                                                                    
           course of therapy and/or medication to see if his depression has dissipated-
           or any of a myriad of other recommendations. However, whatever the       
                                                                                    
           psychologist’s findings are, they all serve the same purpose: to provide an
           additional perspective on the client’s functioning and potential.        
               Perhaps, though, you are having some doubts about how helpful        
                                                                                    
           psychological testing really is, especially since there has always been some
           lingering controversy about the validity of I.Q. tests in particular. And you
           might also be wondering about the effect that categorizing a person’s    
                                                                                    
           intellectual functioning might have on the belief he or others around him
           have in his capacity to accomplish certain tasks. So why is it useful to find
                                                                                    
           out such information, especially about a young child, whose test results 
           regarding I.Q. are most susceptible to change over time?                 
               Let us use a typical case example to illustrate how you and the      
                                                                                    
           treatment team might use the results of psychological testing to make a  
           more informed decision about how-and perhaps even with whom-you could    
                                                                                    
           make the most helpful intervention. A mother brings her nine-year-old son
           for therapy because the school says he “needs help,” reporting that the child
           is in a regular classroom setting where he is disruptive, is failing several
                                                                                    
           subjects, and, according to teacher reports, is “not trying” and has become
           the “class clown.” The parent, who speaks English but has some difficulty
           understanding it because it is not her native tongue, reports that she is
                                                                                    
           frustrated and confused by the school’s response and very disappointed in

=== Page 167 (1 cols) ===
her child. She provides you with recent psychological testing results done at
           the child’s school.                                                      
               And let us say that you read that testing and it indicates that this child
                                                                                    
           has been given the WISC and has demonstrated a full-scale I.Q. of 82,    
           placing him at the low end of the low average range of intelligence. That
                                                                                    
           finding would undoubtedly raise certain questions for you and your       
           supervisor about the meaning of that child’s behavior, the meaning of the
           mother’s perception of the child, and even the meaning of the school’s   
                                                                                    
           recommendation that he “needs help.” If you discovered that this child had
           an I.Q. placing him in the average range of intelligence but with a      
                                                                                    
           significant enough difference between his verbal and performance I.Q.s to
           indicate the likelihood of a learning disability, you would have different
           questions. And still another approach would be indicated if the child had an
                                                                                    
           I.Q. of 136.                                                             
               So one of the reasons for psychological testing is to help you and your
           supervisor and the treatment team to arrive at appropriate interventions and
                                                                                    
           a treatment plan that is based on a realistic and objective assessment of the
           client’s intellectual functioning. And you might ask for psychological   
                                                                                    
           testing at an early stage in your assessment because you have some reason
           to think that there is a discrepancy between the expectations or perceived
           functioning of a client and his actual ability.                          
                                                                                    
               There are numerous other reasons why you might consider              
           psychological testing, for instance, to document an improvement or a     
                                                                                    
           deterioration in a client’s functioning since previous testing was done, or to
           further verify or identify a thought disorder, neurological impairment,  
           memory problem, or learning disability. You might request testing to rule
                                                                                    
           out the possibility that a client’s inner life is impinging on his capacity to
           perform cognitively. Or the test results might be helpful in career      
           counseling, or educational planning-even for determining the outcome of a
                                                                                    
           legal proceeding such as a custody hearing or a case where a toxic       
           substance or other agent has caused an assault on a client’s neurological
                                                                                    
           system.                                                                  
               However, all those good uses of testing notwithstanding, one must    
           consider a caveat about introducing the idea of psychological testing at an
                                                                                    
           early stage in your relationship with a client. Testing an adult takes a 
           minimum of several hours. Testing a child may require a few hours each

=== Page 168 (1 cols) ===
day for two or three days. It involves introducing another person into your
           relationship with the client in a significant role when your relationship is
           barely established. If the testing cannot be done at your facility, it may
                                                                                    
           involve introducing another agency as well. Further, it may raise some   
           additional concern on the client’s part about what might be wrong with him.
                                                                                    
           And, after all that, there is no guarantee that the results will provide you
           with any clear answers to the questions you have about this particular client
           at this time.                                                            
                                                                                    
               So, given those constraints on its usefulness as a source of information
           in the earliest stage of your assessment, as well as the potential for   
                                                                                    
           disrupting the relationship you are trying to forge, there are still times at
           which ruling out a learning disability or identifying specific strengths and
           weaknesses in various aspects of a client’s functioning is either necessary or
                                                                                    
           salutory to the therapy. Further, if you work in a school or a diagnostic
           evaluation center or another setting where psychological testing is a routine
           part of the information-gathering process, then one of your roles in the 
                                                                                    
           agency may be to prepare clients for testing.                            
               So the question becomes: How do you prepare a client- especially a   
                                                                                    
           child-for psychological testing in a way that is not going to produce anxiety
           that could interfere with his test performance? You always start by      
           explaining to the client-and to the parent if the client is a child-why you
                                                                                    
           think the testing might be helpful. For example, “We know you’re having  
           difficulty in school but we aren’t sure why. The test results will help us
                                                                                    
           understand what you’re having trouble with so we can figure out how to   
           help you do better,” or “We need more information about the kinds of     
           memory loss you’re having,” or some other simple, straightforward        
                                                                                    
           explanation of why the testing may be useful.                            
               Next, reassure the client-and again include the parent-that even though
           this is called “testing,” it isn’t a test like one has in school. That is, there
                                                                                    
           might be one or two parts of the test that ask information questions, but
           there will also be puzzles, pictures to draw, and stories to tell.       
                                                                                    
               Third, let the client know that these are tests where everybody gets 
           some answers wrong, so he shouldn’t be surprised when he reaches a point 
           where he is having trouble answering the questions. The point here is that
                                                                                    
           the tests are designed in such a way-particularly on the parts that have to do
           with fund of information-to become progressively more difficult, so that

=== Page 169 (1 cols) ===
eventually the client will reach a level that reflects his capacity and will
           start getting more answers wrong than right. So you need to reassure the 
           client that no one expects him to get all right answers and that he is not
                                                                                    
           “failing the test” if he doesn’t.                                        
               Lastly, if it is a child who is being tested, you need to give him some
                                                                                    
           description of the person who will be testing him and where he will be   
           going for the testing; if possible, show him the room where the testing will
           take place. You can also tell him that this person has tested lots of children
                                                                                    
           you know. Answer any questions the parent or child might have about how  
           long the testing might take, and how, when and by whom the findings will 
                                                                                    
           be explained to them. Then arrange an appointment with them for after the
           testing. You will use that session to talk about what the testing was like and
           to make sure the test results were explained. If they weren’t, make      
                                                                                    
           arrangements for them to be. If they were, be certain that the client    
           understood the explanation.                                              
               When you have done all that, you can feel certain that you have      
                                                                                    
           maximized the usefulness of the psychological testing for the client,    
           yourself, and the treatment team.                                        
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 170 (1 cols) ===
thirteen                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                        H                                                           
                           OW      TO                                               
                                         W                                          
                                             RITE      AN                           
                              A                                                     
                                 SSESSMENT                                          
                                                                                    
           Y                                                                        
              ou have now finished your preliminary interviews and gathered all the 
                                                                                    
           necessary documents from other agencies to complete your assessment.     
           What remains to be done is to write up your findings in some coherent    
                                                                                    
           useful way. The purposes of this chapter are to familiarize you with what is
           expected in an assessment, to offer some guidelines for the order in which
           information should appear, and to pose some questions to which you should
                                                                                    
           provide the answers in writing your document. In addition, you will find a
           sample at the end of this chapter of a biopsychosocial assessment.       
                                                                                    
               Before you begin to write, however, it is important to stop and think
           about who will be reading your assessment now and in the future. Further,
           you should ask yourself to what purposes this document, and the mental   
                                                                                    
           status exam which should accompany it in the record, might eventually be 
           put. If you are a student or an intern, then the case might be transferred to
                                                                                    
           another worker when you leave the agency, or perhaps after you leave the 
           agency. That means another therapist in your agency will be relying on your
           assessment to provide information about the client. Under those          
                                                                                    
           circumstances, your assessment should be thought of as replacing a face-to-
           face discussion.                                                         
               Beyond this obvious value of your assessment as an information tool  
                                                                                    
           for the next therapist, it may also be used at future treatment conferences, or
           some information from it might be given with the client’s consent to a   
                                                                                    
           therapist with whom the client is considering therapy or to some other   
           agency that can provide some services or care not provided by your agency.
               Those are a few examples of situations in which your client might    
                                                                                    
           consent to the use of the assessment, or some part of it, for other purposes.
           There are also circumstances, however, under which your assessment might

=== Page 171 (1 cols) ===
be used without your client’s consent, or even without your consent. For 
           instance, if the case has necessitated a report of suspected child abuse, then
           your assessment might become part of documents which the court           
                                                                                    
           subpoenas to evaluate the need for foster care or to decide who should get
           custody of the child. Under these circumstances, the content of your     
                                                                                    
           assessment and the care and accuracy with which you have written it could
           have long-term implications in the lives of other people. Obviously, it is
           important that you give serious thought beforehand to your use of language
                                                                                    
           and to what you include in your assessment.                              
               However, even after you have written your assessment and added it to 
                                                                                    
           the client’s record, you must think about what is in it. For example, if you
           are writing about a client who has tested positive for HIV, then your state
           may require special protection of those records to ensure that the client is
                                                                                    
           not subject to discrimination or to dissemination of that medical        
           information except under very stringent guidelines.                      
               Having given due consideration to all these aspects of writing an    
                                                                                    
           assessment, always start your document with the client’s identifying data:
           name, date of birth, and the date on which you wrote or dictated the     
                                                                                    
           assessment. Your agency may prefer that you also put your name and title at
           the head of the assessment, or that you put it at the end of the document
           with your signature.                                                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                               ASK    YOURSELF                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Who  else might read this assessment now and in the future?         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               In either case, you next write one or two sentences which are an     
                                                                                    
           introduction to the client, again giving her name, a brief description of one
           or two salient characteristics, her age, her ethnicity, her religion, perhaps
                                                                                    
           her grade and the school she attends, or her marital status. Following that is
           information which may be referred to as the “presenting problem” or the

=== Page 172 (1 cols) ===
“current symptomatology.” Whatever it is called, it should answer, in    
           narrative form, two crucial questions:                                   
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Who recommended  treatment or made the referral?                     
               Why is the client in need of help at this time?                      
                                                                                    
               Following that, you next describe the household in which the client  
                                                                                    
           currently resides. This section should include answers to:               
                                                                                    
               Where does the client live?                                          
                                                                                    
               Who else lives there?                                                
               Who takes care of whom?                                              
               What work does each member of the household do?                      
                                                                                    
               How does the family currently support itself?                        
               Is this a change in the family’s financial or living conditions?     
                                                                                    
               After that, most of the important historical and developmental       
                                                                                    
           information on your client should be stated in a chronological narrative,
           beginning, in the case of children, with information about their parents. For
                                                                                    
           adults, it should begin with their significant recollections of their family of
           origin. Following is a list of questions to consider, beginning with those
           more applicable to adults. Depending on your client’s age, some will be  
                                                                                    
           relevant and some will not. You should try to answer all those that seem 
           especially pertinent to your client’s history:                           
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Who constituted her family of origin?                                
               What was her place in the order of siblings?                         
               How does she characterize her relationship with her mother?          
                                                                                    
               How does she characterize her relationship with her father?          
               How does she characterize her relationship with each of her siblings?
               How does she characterize her parents’ relationship with each other? 
                                                                                    
               Which members of her family of origin have died?                     
               What contact does she have with surviving members of her family of   
               origin?                                                              
                                                                                    
               What were the significant emotional events of her childhood?         
               How old was she when each of these events occurred?                  
               What effect did these events have on her?

=== Page 173 (1 cols) ===
How was her health as a child?                                       
               How was the health of other family members during her childhood?     
               What was the family’s involvement in the life of the community?      
                                                                                    
               What was the family’s involvement in ethnic or cultural activities?  
               What was the family’s involvement in religious activities?           
               Did she have a strong identification with a social, cultural, ethnic or
                                                                                    
               religious group?                                                     
               Did she have friends?                                                
               What schools did she attend?                                         
                                                                                    
               How did she do academically while in school?                         
               How did she do behaviorally while in school?                         
               What was the last grade in school that she completed?                
                                                                                    
               Why did she leave school?                                            
               Did she ever serve in the military?                                  
               What jobs has she held?                                              
                                                                                    
               For how long did she work at each?                                   
               Does she currently work?                                             
               At what age did she have her first sexual relationship?              
                                                                                    
               Has she ever been married?                                           
               Is she currently married?                                            
               If not, how did the marriage end?                                    
                                                                                    
               If so, what is the character of her relationship with her spouse?    
               Has she ever been pregnant?                                          
               Does she have children?                                              
                                                                                    
               What is the character of her relationship with her children?         
               Does she have friends?                                               
               Does she see them occasionally or frequently?                        
               Does she belong to any social, professional, cultural, educational, or
                                                                                    
               religious organizations?                                             
               Does she participate in their activities?                            
               Has she ever had any serious health problems?                        
                                                                                    
               If so, what was the nature of the problems?                          
               Is she presently in good health?                                     
               If not, what is the nature of the current health problem?            
                                                                                    
               Has she ever been in therapy before?                                 
               If so, why did the previous therapy end?                             
               Has she ever been hospitalized for a psychiatric condition?

=== Page 174 (1 cols) ===
Has she ever been medicated for a psychiatric condition?             
               Has she ever had a problem with drugs or alcohol?                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               Obviously, some of these questions are not applicable to children or 
           adolescents. If the client is a child or adolescent, you should include  
           answers to the following questions:                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               What were the medical, physical, social, and emotional conditions    
               under which the child was born?                                      
               How would you characterize the mother’s relationship with the child? 
                                                                                    
               How would you characterize the father’s relationship with the child? 
               How would you characterize the child’s relationship with her siblings?
               What have been the significant psychological events in the child’s life?
                                                                                    
               How old was the child when these events occurred?                    
               Did the child reach all developmental milestones within the normal   
               time frame?                                                          
                                                                                    
               If not, which milestones were early and which were delayed?          
               Has the child had any significant health problems?                   
               If so, what were they?                                               
                                                                                    
               Is the child currently in good health?                               
               If not, what is the nature of the current health problems?           
               Does the child have friends?                                         
                                                                                    
               How would you describe the character of these relationships?         
               Does the child participate in any social, cultural, religious or     
               educational activities?                                              
                                                                                    
               What school does the child attend?                                   
               What grade is the child in?                                          
               Is that the grade she should be in?                                  
                                                                                    
               If not, why not?                                                     
               How is the child doing in school at this time?                       
               Is that a change in school performance?                              
                                                                                    
               What does the child’s teacher report about the child’s behavior and  
               functioning at school?                                               
               If the child has had psychological testing, what were the significant
                                                                                    
               findings of that testing?

=== Page 175 (1 cols) ===
When you have completed the history, you next want to focus on       
           describing the salient aspects of the client’s treatment to this point. This
           section should include answers to the following:                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
               How many times has the client been seen by you for therapy?          
               What is the current treatment modality?                              
                                                                                    
               How frequently is the client seen for therapy?                       
               How does the client behave when she comes for therapy?               
               How does the client behave toward you when she comes for therapy?    
                                                                                    
               Have the client’s behavior or feelings changed since she started     
               coming for therapy?                                                  
               If so, in what way?                                                  
                                                                                    
               What do you see as the clinical issues which need to be addressed in 
               therapy?                                                             
               Is the client motivated to participate in therapy?                   
                                                                                    
               What are the client’s goals in therapy?                              
               What is your estimate at this time of the client’s prognosis?        
                                                                                    
               The last item in a biopsychosocial assessment is a diagnosis. Ideally,
                                                                                    
           this is arrived at in consultation with your supervisor and other members of
           the treatment team during a conference at which the modality, frequency, 
                                                                                    
           and goals of treatment are delineated. Arriving at a diagnosis is a complex
           process and one that has engendered controversy which it would not be    
           useful to debate here. At this stage in your learning, however, it is important
                                                                                    
           to begin familiarizing yourself with how to read a diagnostic manual, which
           diagnoses belong on which axis, and what the criteria are for some of the
                                                                                    
           more frequently encountered diagnoses in your work setting.              
               Now all that remains to think about is how you are going to find time
           to sit down and actually write your assessment.                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           B                                                                        
            IOPSYCHOSOCIAL                                                          
                           A                                                        
                            SSESSMENT                                               
                                     : A S                                          
                                          AMPLE                                     
           Name: Mariana M.                                                         
           Date of Birth: 2/26/85                                                   
           Date of Assessment: 10/9/93                                              
           PRESENTING    PROBLEM

=== Page 176 (1 cols) ===
Mariana M. is a petite, shy 8 1/2-year-old Catholic female whose mother is
           Panamanian and whose father was of Italian descent. Mariana was brought  
           to the West City Mental Health Clinic by her paternal grandmother, Sofia P.
                                                                                    
           Ms. P. was referred to West City by the Children’s Protection Agency after
           Mariana was removed from her mother’s home and placed in Sofia’s         
                                                                                    
           temporary custody, following an incident in which Mariana was burned on  
           her back with a steam iron six weeks ago. Mariana has repeatedly stated  
           that she “fell on the iron,” but medical findings and investigator’s reports
                                                                                    
           indicate that the burn could not have occurred accidentally. A hearing is set
           for next month to determine if Sofia will have permanent custody. Sofia  
                                                                                    
           reports that, since coming to live with her, Mariana has been refusing to do
           her school work, getting into fights with other children, stealing food at
           home, and lying to Sofia. She also reports some sleep disturbances and   
                                                                                    
           Mariana’s “crying at the drop of a hat.”                                 
                                                                                    
           HOUSEHOLD    DESCRIPTION                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           Mariana currently lives with her paternal grandmother, Sofia P., age 53, and
                                                                                    
           her grandfather, Arturo P., age 58, both of whom are immigrants from Italy.
           Sofia works as a secretary in a law firm; Arturo is a tinsmith who works for
           an air conditioning company. They live in a two-bedroom apartment in the 
                                                                                    
           Ridgewood section of Fallston, where they have resided for 12 years.     
                                                                                    
           HISTORICAL   AND  DEVELOPMENTAL       DATA                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           Mariana was the result of a casual sexual liaison between Arturo and     
           Sofia’s only child, Paolo, and Carmelita A., a Panamanian whom Paolo met 
                                                                                    
           while stationed in Panama City with the U.S. Army. Paolo was 20,         
           Carmelita was 21 and had a 2-year-old daughter, Alicia, by a previous    
                                                                                    
           liaison. While pregnant with Mariana, Carmelita followed Paolo to Fallston
           when he left the military. They had a conflictual relationship and did not
           live together.                                                           
                                                                                    
               Arturo and Sofia were unaware of Carmelita’s presence in Fallston    
           until three months later, when Paolo was hit and killed by a drunk driver. At
                                                                                    
           his funeral, Carmelita told Arturo and Sofia that she was 5 months pregnant
           with Paolo’s child, whom Carmelita stated she did not want. An agreement

=== Page 177 (1 cols) ===
was reached that Arturo and Sofia would pay for Carmelita’s prenatal care
           and would adopt the baby at birth. However, when Mariana was born,       
           Carmelita changed her mind and, with financial assistance from Arturo and
                                                                                    
           Sofia, brought Alicia from Panama and moved to a larger apartment with   
           her two children.                                                        
                                                                                    
               Details of Carmelita’s prenatal care prior to 5 months are unknown,  
           but records from the Central Hospital Pre-Natal Care Clinic indicate that,
           when examined at 5 months, Carmelita suffered from anemia and asthma     
                                                                                    
           and was suspected of being a cocaine abuser, though she denied any       
           substance use. She did not come for her appointment at 6 months and at 7 
                                                                                    
           months had gained no weight since her previous visit.                    
               Mariana was born 5½ weeks early and weighed 4 lbs. 8 oz. Labor       
           lasted 3 hours. Sofia states that she accompanied Carmelita to the hospital
                                                                                    
           and that Carmelita was given no anesthetic during the delivery after a pelvic
           sonogram indicated signs of fetal distress. Mariana was born with the    
           umbilicus wrapped around her neck. She was kept in an incubator for 5    
                                                                                    
           days, after which Carmelita took her home for 3 days, then told Sofia to 
           come and get her. Mariana remained with Sofia and Arturo for 4 months,   
                                                                                    
           during which time Sofia states that Mariana gained weight quickly, was a 
           good eater, and slept through the night by 7 weeks.                      
               After 4 months, Carmelita wanted Mariana back, but agreed she could  
                                                                                    
           spend every weekend with her grandparents. In addition, Sofia came twice 
           weekly to the apartment to bring food and diapers for the children and to
                                                                                    
           check on Mariana, whom Sofia reports “always seemed to pull into a shell 
           at her mother’s house.” Sofia also took Mariana for all medical checkups 
           and cared for her during routine childhood illnesses. Arturo and Sofia   
                                                                                    
           continued to request that Carmelita allow them to adopt Mariana.         
               This caretaking arrangement continued for the next 4½ years, during  
           which time Carmelita would occasionally disappear for several months at a
                                                                                    
           time, leaving Mariana with her grandparents, who believe Carmelita was   
           abusing drugs during these absences. Sofia weaned Mariana from the bottle
                                                                                    
           at 16 months and toilet trained her at 2½ years with no difficulty.      
               Just before Mariana’s fifth birthday, Carmelita disappeared with her 
           children for 8 months. Sofia has no knowledge of their whereabouts during
                                                                                    
           this time but states that Mariana was “a different child” when she returned
           to Fallston, sometimes hoarding food in her bed when she visited Sofia on

=== Page 178 (1 cols) ===
weekends and crying herself to sleep. When questioned by Sofia, Mariana  
           “just looked terrified.”                                                 
               Carmelita told Sofia only that “Mariana went to kindergarten” during 
                                                                                    
           that period, but Sofia states that, when Mariana started first grade at  
           Fallston Elementary School the next year, the teacher reported that “she has
                                                                                    
           no idea what goes on in a school,” and had probably never been to school 
           before. Mariana quickly caught up to the other children academically, but
           isolated herself socially.                                               
                                                                                    
               Since their return to Fallston almost 3 years ago, Carmelita has been
           involved with several men, two of whom have lived with her and her       
                                                                                    
           daughters in a one-bedroom apartment. She worked briefly as a mill worker,
           and then in a fast-food restaurant, and currently receives public assistance.
               Sofia has been concerned on several occasions in the last year about 
                                                                                    
           bruises on Mariana, but Mariana has consistently stated that they were   
           accidents and six months ago Carmelita warned Sofia that, if she did not 
           stop asking Mariana questions, Sofia “will never see your grandchild     
                                                                                    
           again.”                                                                  
               Prior to being burned, Mariana was attending the third grade at      
                                                                                    
           Fallston Elementary School. Reports from the school indicate that she    
           received standardized state tests at the beginning of this year and was at or
           above grade level in all subjects. After Mariana was removed from her    
                                                                                    
           mother, Sofia sent her to St. Mary’s, a parochial school in Webster. Her 
           teacher currently reports Mariana is “unable to concentrate; frequently gets
                                                                                    
           out of her seat; and, if she did know how to read before, appears to have
           forgotten it. She frequently initiates fights with other children, and has poor
           socialization skills.”                                                   
                                                                                    
               Mariana has had no unusual medical history. She had recurrent ear    
           infections as an infant, but has no evidence of any permanent medical    
           problems as a result. She continues to be seen at Central Hospital Clinic for
                                                                                    
           care of her burn, which her doctor reports is healing normally. In light of
           her mother’s suspected substance abuse, she was recently tested for AIDS 
                                                                                    
           and the results were negative.                                           
               Mr. Daley, Mariana’s caseworker at the Children’s Protection Agency, 
           anticipates that Carmelita will not attempt to regain custody of Mariana at
                                                                                    
           the hearing next month. The Children’s Protection Agency is continuing

=== Page 179 (1 cols) ===
their investigation and will interview Mariana again next week. They are 
           currently evaluating the need to remove Alicia from Carmelita’s care.    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           CLIENT  CONTACT                                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           Mariana has been seen 1 time weekly for 4 individual sessions and twice  
           with her grandmother. She is a vigilant, verbal little girl who is easily
           moved to tears. She states constantly that she misses her mother and is  
                                                                                    
           confused by the idea that her mother may not have treated her the way she
           should. She continues to deny that her mother burned her and says that her
           mother was “outside when I fell on the iron.” She also states that she got
                                                                                    
           burned “because I was bad.” She has expressed a wish to come for therapy 
           “every day” and seems to feel soothed by talking about these painful     
                                                                                    
           incidents, even though she continually states that she was removed from her
           mother, “because I didn’t listen to her.”                                
               Mariana is able now to talk with some ease about her feelings, but,  
                                                                                    
           considering all the unknown aspects of her early experience and          
           functioning, her prognosis at this time can only be approximated as fair to
                                                                                    
           good.                                                                    
                                                                                    
           DSM-III-R DIAGNOSIS                                                      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           Axis I: 309.40 Adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and
           conduct                                                                  
                                                                                    
           Axis II: 799.90 Deferred                                                 
           Axis III: Healthy child with burn on back                                
           Axis IV: Psychosocial stressors: physical trauma and abrupt separation from
                                                                                    
           parent                                                                   
           Severity: 6-Extreme                                                      
                                                                                    
           Axis V: Highest level of adaptive functioning past year: 4 - Fair Prepared
           by Susan Lukas, MSW                                                      
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 180 (1 cols) ===
fourteen                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
              W                                                                     
                  HERE                                                              
                              Y                                                     
                                 OU                                                 
                                        G                                           
                                           O   FROM                                 
                                                           H                        
                                                               ERE                  
           B                                                                        
             elieve it or not, having read this whole book, added all these assessment
           tools to your array of clinical skills, and finished the writing of your first
           assessment, you have completed only the initial phase of treatment. It is
           hoped that, having gotten this far, you not only feel more assured but also
           have the will and capacity to move on to the subsequent stages. However, it
           is also hoped that you have realized that will and capacity are not sufficient
           to engage a client in therapy. Without concern, respect, and interested  
           listening on your part, there will be no therapy. If you can remember that-
           and the importance of curiosity rather than criticism of that which is   
           different from your ethnic, cultural, social, or emotional experience-you
                                                                                    
           will not only love your work but also become a wonderful therapist.      
               This brief chapter will be devoted simply to pointing you in some    
           directions you might go next in pursuit of that goal.                    
                                                                                    
               If you are currently in school, try to arrange your courses so you can
           learn the theory of family therapy or child treatment or whatever it is that
                                                                                    
           you need to know at the same time as you are having the experience in your
           field placement. If that is not possible, and will not be possible, then ask
           someone who is in the course you wish you could take for a copy of the   
                                                                                    
           course bibliography.                                                     
               For every subject that has been briefly covered in this book, whole  
           volumes have been written on both theory and practice. They offer        
                                                                                    
           explorations of a wide variety of clinical, social, ethnic, cultural,    
           ideological, and moral perspectives. Find what you need and read it. If you
                                                                                    
           cannot find it in just one volume, go to the numerous journals for your  
           profession. If they don’t tell you everything you need to know, go to the
           journals of allied professional groups. In other words, seek and-given   
                                                                                    
           access to a halfway decent library-ye shall find.

=== Page 181 (1 cols) ===
Even if you are not currently in school, you can still continue to learn.
           In most cities there are societies, institutes, lecture series, and workshops,
           the purposes of which are to offer advanced training or opportunities for
                                                                                    
           continuing education. If you live in an area where such opportunities are
           few and far between, you can initiate learning by contacting other clinicians
                                                                                    
           in the region to participate in peer-group discussion or supervision. That is,
           you could meet regularly with others who have a similar interest in some 
           aspect of clinical work to discuss theory or practice issues, always bearing
                                                                                    
           in mind the importance of disguising material from specific cases.       
               In addition, whether you are a student or a full-time practitioner, you
                                                                                    
           should make it a point to join at least one professional organization. Apart
           from their function as advocates for the interests of your professional group,
           these organizations usually publish a number of extremely useful         
                                                                                    
           documents: e.g., guidelines for ethical behavior and standards of practice;
           journals that reflect the current trends; a newsletter to keep you abreast of
           political concerns, practice management issues, and social activities; a 
                                                                                    
           membership list that provides you with names of peers in your area.      
               Beyond all these obvious benefits of belonging to professional       
                                                                                    
           organizations, they are also likely to be your most up-todate resource for
           finding out your legal obligations as a therapist. Like all laws, those  
           concerning our role and responsibilities are constantly being refined,   
                                                                                    
           changed, expanded, or overturned. New legislation or a court decision in 
           one state may set a precedent that will eventually be adopted nationwide.
                                                                                    
           What was appropriate practice yesterday may or may not be tomorrow.      
           Even if you are a student today, being aware of these changes will       
           ultimately become your responsibility, so it is probably wise to start   
                                                                                    
           learning about them now.                                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                  REMEMBER                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                Without concern, respect, and interested listening, there will      
                                                                                    
                be no therapy.

=== Page 182 (1 cols) ===
And that, ultimately, is the single most salient component of the work
           you have chosen; that is, continuous learning. It is both a demand of clinical
           work that you keep informing yourself in order to better understand and  
                                                                                    
           meet your client’s needs and the pleasure and glory of the work. You will
           think, talk, read, teach, write, and dream about it-but it is unlikely that you
                                                                                    
           will ever be bored by it.                                                
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 183 (1 cols) ===
I                                               
                                      NDEX                                          
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           abuse:                                                                   
               assessment of children for, 138-51                                   
               versus neglect, 141                                                  
                                                                                    
               use of records in court, 163                                         
           accidents as evidence of suicidal behavior, 107                          
                                                                                    
           acrophobia, 25                                                           
           adult, first interview with, 1-12                                        
           affect:                                                                  
                                                                                    
               client’s, and the mental status exam, 19                             
               definition of, 15                                                    
               variability of, 19-20                                                
                                                                                    
           affection in a couple, 99                                                
           age:                                                                     
                                                                                    
               chronological versus apparent, 65                                    
               and conduct, assessment of a child’s, 64-65                          
               and suicide, 113                                                     
                                                                                    
           agency procedure and policy:                                             
               for administration of a mental status exam, 14-15                    
                                                                                    
               on confidentiality for children in therapy, 74-76                    
               on family therapy, 46-47                                             
               form for a mental status exam, 16                                    
                                                                                    
               on interviews with clients under the influence of drugs, 131-32      
               for management of suicidal clients, 117                              
               for obtaining access to medical information, 33                      
                                                                                    
               on physical contact with children, 70                                
               for preparation of written assessments, 163                          
                                                                                    
               on psychotropic medications, 40                                      
               for reducing danger to the staff, 102                                
               on reporting suspected child abuse, 139                              
                                                                                    
               for requiring a client’s medical examination, 38                     
               on sequence for interviewing family members, 62-63

=== Page 184 (1 cols) ===
on supervising a client’s medications, 40-41                         
               on threatened violence by clients, 94                                
               on treatment of substance abusers, 129                               
                                                                                    
           agoraphobia, 25                                                          
           alcohol:                                                                 
                                                                                    
               and suicide, 116                                                     
               see also substance abuse                                             
           anger:                                                                   
                                                                                    
               caretaker’s, 66                                                      
               a child’s expression of, 118                                         
                                                                                    
               therapist’s, 64                                                      
           antisocial tendencies, and suicide, 115                                  
           appearance:                                                              
                                                                                    
               and assessment of physical neglect, 142                              
               client’s, and the mental status exam, 15                             
               client’s, and the mental status exam questions, 29                   
                                                                                    
               of a potentially dangerous client, 108-9                             
           appointments, making at the end of the first interview, 10               
                                                                                    
           appropriateness of a client’s affect, 20                                 
           assessment:                                                              
               of a child, drawings and questions for, 71-72                        
                                                                                    
               of a child’s age-appropriate conduct, 64-65                          
               of a client’s risk for suicide, 123-24                               
                                                                                    
               of imminent risk, 148                                                
               as a phase of therapy, xii                                           
               of a risk of suicide, 126-27                                         
                                                                                    
               of substance abuse, 130-37                                           
               of substance abuse potential, 136-37                                 
               of a violent client, 103                                             
                                                                                    
               written, 162-71                                                      
               see also biopsychosocial assessment; evaluation; mental status exam  
                                                                                    
           associations, observing in a mental status exam, 21                      
           attachments:                                                             
               depth of a child’s, 82                                               
                                                                                    
               evaluating a child’s, 73-74

=== Page 185 (1 cols) ===
audiotape record, xiii                                                   
                                                                                    
           behavior, ascribing meaning to prematurely, 33-34                        
                                                                                    
           behavioral symptoms:                                                     
               of abuse or neglect, 140                                             
                                                                                    
               of neglect, 149                                                      
               of physical abuse, 150                                               
               of sexual abuse, 152                                                 
                                                                                    
           biopsychosocial assessment:                                              
               and assessment of potential for violence, 105                        
                                                                                    
               client’s contributions to, 13                                        
               example of, 169-71                                                   
               written, 168                                                         
                                                                                    
           boundaries within the family, 55                                         
                                                                                    
           caretakers:                                                              
                                                                                    
               characteristics of abusive, 150-51                                   
               characteristics of neglectful, 149                                   
                                                                                    
               characteristics of sexually abusive, 152                             
               characteristics suggesting a potential for abuse or neglect, 140-41  
               control over circumstances surrounding neglect, 143-44               
                                                                                    
               definition of a child’s problem by, 65-66                            
               interviews with, 78-79                                               
                                                                                    
               neglect by an unfit individual, 143                                  
               see also parents                                                     
           case history, reviewing for a record of violence, 103                    
                                                                                    
           central nervous system damage, and potential for violence, 106           
           change, time frame for effecting, xv                                     
           children:                                                                
                                                                                    
               assessment of abused, 138-51                                         
               capabilities and character of, 84                                    
                                                                                    
               concept of death and dying, 121                                      
               description of relationships in a written assessment, 166-67         
               first interviews with, 58-77                                         
                                                                                    
               paradoxes of treatment for, 60-61                                    
               presence at family interviews, 47-48

=== Page 186 (1 cols) ===
suicidal, 113                                                        
               symptoms of HIV infection in, 42                                     
               use of records in court, 163                                         
                                                                                    
               working definition of, 58                                            
           choice-making in a couple, 98                                            
                                                                                    
           chronological age versus apparent age, 65                                
           circularity:                                                             
               of communication, 45                                                 
                                                                                    
               in a mother-child interaction, 82                                    
           circumstantiality, definition of, 21                                     
                                                                                    
           client:                                                                  
               assurances for a potentially violent, 110                            
               attitude toward the therapist, 30                                    
                                                                                    
               biopsychosocial assessment, 171                                      
               danger from, 101-11                                                  
               hearing the story of, 1, 7                                           
                                                                                    
               information about, xi-xvi                                            
               initial presentation of, xiii-xiv                                    
                                                                                    
               suicidal, 112-27                                                     
               whole family as, 45                                                  
           clinical jargon, 7                                                       
                                                                                    
           command hallucinations, and suicidal ideation, 116                       
           communication:                                                           
                                                                                    
               acknowledging the client’s, 1                                        
               circular, 45                                                         
               clinical jargon, 7                                                   
                                                                                    
               family patterns of, 50                                               
               a family’s system of, 53-54                                          
               between members of a couple, 91-92                                   
                                                                                    
               nonverbal, between children and caretakers, 66                       
               with a suicidal client, 120, 124-25                                  
                                                                                    
               symbolic and metaphorical, by children, 60                           
               with the therapist by individual family members, 51                  
               see also listening                                                   
                                                                                    
           community mental health clinic as the setting for meeting clients, xiv-xv
           comprehensive assessment, see biopsychosocial assessment

=== Page 187 (1 cols) ===
compulsions, 24                                                          
           concentration, capacity for, 26                                          
           confidentiality:                                                         
                                                                                    
               informing the client about, 10                                       
               permission to communicate with referral sources, 66                  
                                                                                    
               and suicidal ideation, 117, 122                                      
               in therapy with children, 74-76                                      
               and use of written assessments, 162-63                               
                                                                                    
           conflict:                                                                
               within the client, 8                                                 
                                                                                    
               constructive and destructive argument, 93                            
               family, 50-51                                                        
               resolution of, by a couple, 98                                       
                                                                                    
               responsibility for a couple’s, 93-94                                 
               and suicide, 124                                                     
               see also differences                                                 
                                                                                    
           confrontation with clients, 110                                          
           consent, client’s permission to provide services, 10                     
                                                                                    
           context:                                                                 
               of drug use, 133-34                                                  
               of family problems, 53                                               
                                                                                    
           continuing education for a therapist, 172-73                             
           contract with a client for expressing anger, 94                          
                                                                                    
           control:                                                                 
               in a couple, 98                                                      
               delusions of, 23-24                                                  
                                                                                    
           couples, first interview with, 87-100                                    
           culture:                                                                 
               and assessment of physical neglect, 141-42                           
                                                                                    
               and family roles, 47                                                 
               and family structure, 49                                             
                                                                                    
               and meanings of alcohol and drugs, 132                               
               and meanings of health and illness, 41-42                            
               and physical abuse, 144-45                                           
                                                                                    
           curiosity, therapist’s, 172

=== Page 188 (1 cols) ===
current symptomatology, see presenting problem                           
                                                                                    
           delusions:                                                               
                                                                                    
               and assessment of potential for violence, 104-5                      
               observation of, in the mental status exam, 23                        
                                                                                    
           depression, postpartum, 83                                               
           despair, a child’s expression of, 118                                    
           detox programs, 129                                                      
                                                                                    
           developmental history, 78-86                                             
               milestones in, 83                                                    
                                                                                    
               sample biopsychosocial assessment, 169-71                            
           diagnosis:                                                               
               and likelihood of violence, 103-4                                    
                                                                                    
               previous, and potential for suicide, 115                             
               reliability and recentness of, 104                                   
               sample biopsychosocial assessment, 171                               
                                                                                    
               in a written assessment, 168                                         
               Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), 103     
                                                                                    
           diagnostic assessment, see biopsychosocial assessment                    
           differences:                                                             
               in a couple, 92-93                                                   
                                                                                    
               a family’s expressions of, 54                                        
               see also conflict                                                    
                                                                                    
           discretion, and family communication, 55                                 
           documentation of a mental status exam, 18                                
           door-knob syndrome, 11-12                                                
                                                                                    
           drawings for assessment of children, 71-72                               
           drugs, and suicide, 116                                                  
           duration of problems, and assessment of potential for violence, 105      
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           educational neglect, 143                                                 
                                                                                    
           effects of substance abuse, 134-35                                       
           emotional functioning, testing of, 155                                   
           emotional neglect, 143                                                   
                                                                                    
           emotional neutrality, 7-8                                                
           emotions:

=== Page 189 (1 cols) ===
client’s, and the mental status exam, 15, 18                         
               client’s, mental status exam questions, 29                           
           empathy with parents, 68                                                 
                                                                                    
           environment, prenatal, 81                                                
           evaluation:                                                              
                                                                                    
               of imminent risk, child abuse or neglect, 148                        
               of suitability and significance of tests, 157                        
               see also assessment                                                  
                                                                                    
           expectations:                                                            
               versus ability, 159                                                  
                                                                                    
               a couple’s initial, 96-98                                            
               mother’s, and child’s characteristics, 83-84                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           family:                                                                  
               definition of, 48                                                    
               description of, sample biopsychosocial assessment, 169-70            
                                                                                    
               first interview with a, 44-57                                        
               medical history of, 41-42                                            
                                                                                    
           family history:                                                          
               questions about substance abuse, 131                                 
               of suicide, 116                                                      
                                                                                    
           family interview, parallels with a couple’s interview, 91                
           family of origin, description in a written assessment, 164-66            
                                                                                    
           family secrets, and sexual abuse, 146                                    
           family therapy, 44-57                                                    
               reframing the problem in, 2                                          
                                                                                    
           fear in abused children, 146                                             
           feelings:                                                                
               acting out, by children, 60                                          
                                                                                    
               asking the client to articulate, 8                                   
               about a child’s physical circumstances, 81-82                        
                                                                                    
               parents’, 84                                                         
           first impression, therapist’s, 5-6                                       
           flexibility of a family, 53-54                                           
                                                                                    
           flight of ideas, 21-22                                                   
           focus:

=== Page 190 (1 cols) ===
on the client, 7                                                     
               in family therapy, 53                                                
           frequency:                                                               
                                                                                    
               of problems, and assessment of potential for violence, 105           
               of suicidal thoughts, 120                                            
                                                                                    
           full-scale I.Q., 157                                                     
           functioning level, identification of strengths and weaknesses, 160       
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           gender:                                                                  
               and family roles, 49                                                 
                                                                                    
               and suicide, 113                                                     
           ghosts, influence on family relationships, 53                            
           goals:                                                                   
                                                                                    
               and circumstantiality, 20                                            
               in conducting a family interview, 47                                 
               in the first interview, 1                                            
                                                                                    
               starting where the client is, 6-7                                    
           greeting a client, 5                                                     
                                                                                    
           group therapy for substance abuse, 129                                   
           guidelines:                                                              
               for a couple in therapy, 92-93                                       
                                                                                    
               for reviewing a potential for violent behavior, 104                  
               see also agency procedure and policy                                 
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           hallucinations, 25                                                       
               and assessment of potential for violence, 105                        
                                                                                    
               and suicidal ideation, 116                                           
           health of a client, 32-43                                                
           hierarchy, family, 49                                                    
                                                                                    
           history:                                                                 
               in a written assessment, 164-67, 169-71                              
                                                                                    
           HIV infection:                                                           
               symptoms of, 42                                                      
               use of records indicating, 163                                       
                                                                                    
           homicidal ideation, 25                                                   
           homicide, and substance abuse, 129

=== Page 191 (1 cols) ===
hope, establishing for a client, 95-96                                   
           hospitalization for substance abuse, 129                                 
           human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, 163                        
                                                                                    
               symptoms of, 42                                                      
           hypotheses, premature, xiv                                               
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           ideas of reference, 23                                                   
           identified patient:                                                      
                                                                                    
               in family therapy, 45-46                                             
               vulnerability of, 52-53                                              
                                                                                    
           illusions, 25                                                            
           immediacy of family therapy, 52                                          
           imminent risk assessment, 148                                            
                                                                                    
           impulse control:                                                         
               assessment of, 103                                                   
               and suicide, 115                                                     
                                                                                    
           inadequate supervision as neglect, 143                                   
           inference of meaning from observations, 16-17                            
                                                                                    
           information:                                                             
               for assessment of a client’s health status, 36-37                    
               basic data about a client, 9                                         
                                                                                    
               from a child, 69                                                     
               obtaining from a couple, 95                                          
                                                                                    
           insight, client’s capacity for, 26-27                                    
           intellectual functioning, confounding factors in testing of, 154         
           intelligence:                                                            
                                                                                    
               levels of, 157                                                       
               observations about the client’s, 26                                  
           intensity:                                                               
                                                                                    
               of a client’s affect, 20                                             
               of suicidal thoughts, 120                                            
                                                                                    
           interactions:                                                            
               in a couple, 88                                                      
               in a family, 53                                                      
                                                                                    
           interpretation:                                                          
               of I.Q. tests, 157

=== Page 192 (1 cols) ===
of psychological tests, 156                                          
           intervention:                                                            
               basing on a client’s intellectual functioning, 159                   
                                                                                    
               and safety issues, 94                                                
           intimacy, levels of, 99                                                  
                                                                                    
           intoxication, and assessment of potential for violence, 106              
                                                                                    
           joining with the client:                                                 
                                                                                    
               in couple’s therapy, 91                                              
               in family therapy, 49-50                                             
                                                                                    
           judgment, client’s, 26-27                                                
               impaired, in social relationships, 104-5                             
               and physical abuse or neglect, 106                                   
                                                                                    
               quality of, and suicide, 115                                         
           judgment, therapist’s:                                                   
               about individual interviews and family therapy, 57                   
                                                                                    
               during information gathering, 133                                    
               premature, 9                                                         
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           lability of a client’s affect, 20                                        
           language:                                                                
                                                                                    
               and meaning, 60                                                      
               play as, 60                                                          
                                                                                    
           learning disability:                                                     
               assessment of, 160                                                   
               and consistency of I.Q. scores, 157                                  
                                                                                    
           leave-taking at the end of an interview, 11-12                           
           legal responsibility:                                                    
               versus confidentiality, 76                                           
                                                                                    
               in management of suicide, 117                                        
               for protecting a child from abuse, 145                               
                                                                                    
               for protection of HIV positive clients, 163                          
               for reporting abuse by people other than caretakers, 141             
               for reporting child abuse or neglect, 138-39                         
                                                                                    
               of therapists, 173-74                                                
               and threats by clients, 102-3

=== Page 193 (1 cols) ===
listening:                                                               
               in the client-therapist relationship, 1-2                            
               importance in therapy, 173                                           
                                                                                    
               to parents and caretakers, 66                                        
           loop of communication and symptoms, 45                                   
                                                                                    
           loose associations, 21-22                                                
                                                                                    
           mandated reporters of suspected child abuse, 139                         
                                                                                    
           meaning:                                                                 
               of a medical history, 41                                             
                                                                                    
               personal, of health issues, 37-38                                    
           medical history, 3-4, 32-43                                              
               and assessment of potential for violence, 106-7                      
                                                                                    
               of the family, 41-42                                                 
               questions about substance abuse, 131                                 
               questions to ask, 43                                                 
                                                                                    
           medical neglect, 142-43                                                  
           medication, prescribed and over-the-counter, 38-41                       
                                                                                    
           memory, kinds of, and observations about, 26                             
           mental capacities, 25-26                                                 
               client’s, and the mental status exam, 15                             
                                                                                    
               mental status exam questions about, 30                               
           mental status exam, 13-31                                                
                                                                                    
               essential areas of, 15                                               
               example, 31                                                          
               outline, general areas of observation, 29-30                         
                                                                                    
               parallel with assessment of a child, 72                              
               review for suicidal ideation, 115-16                                 
               review of prior, 104-5                                               
                                                                                    
           mood:                                                                    
               client’s, and the mental status exam, 18-19                          
                                                                                    
               definition of, 15                                                    
               effect of medication on, 40                                          
               of a suicidal client, 118-19                                         
                                                                                    
           mother as the source of a developmental history, 79-81

=== Page 194 (1 cols) ===
myths about suicide, 113-15                                              
                                                                                    
           neglect:                                                                 
                                                                                    
               versus abuse, 141                                                    
               assessment of children for, 138-51                                   
                                                                                    
               and assessment of potential for violence, 106                        
               forms of, 141-43                                                     
               physical signs of, 149                                               
                                                                                    
               symptoms of, 149                                                     
           nonverbal communication:                                                 
                                                                                    
               between children and caretakers, 66                                  
               in a couple, 92                                                      
           note-taking, 5                                                           
                                                                                    
               in preparation for a first interview, 2-3                            
                                                                                    
           observations:                                                            
                                                                                    
               versus assumptions, 17                                               
               about a child, 64-65                                                 
                                                                                    
               of a client, 108-9                                                   
               of a client during testing, 156-57                                   
               systematic, 155                                                      
                                                                                    
               systematic, using a mental status exam, 13-31                        
           obsession, 24                                                            
                                                                                    
           orientation, 25-26                                                       
                                                                                    
           parents:                                                                 
                                                                                    
               abusive, 145                                                         
               mother as the source of a developmental history, 79-81               
               place in child’s therapy, 62-64, 76-77                               
                                                                                    
               views of behaviors toward a child, 144-45                            
               wish to know about therapy, and confidentiality issues, 75           
                                                                                    
               see also caretakers                                                  
           participation of individuals, in family therapy, 52                      
           perceived functioning versus ability, 159                                
                                                                                    
           performance I.Q. score versus verbal I.Q. score, 157                     
           performance subtests, Wechsler series, 155

=== Page 195 (1 cols) ===
persecution, delusions of, 23                                            
           perseveration, observing a client’s, 21                                  
           personal development of individuals in a couple, 89-90                   
                                                                                    
           phobias, 25                                                              
           physical abuse:                                                          
                                                                                    
               and assessment of potential for violence, 106                        
               behavioral symptoms of, 150                                          
               intentional, 144                                                     
                                                                                    
               signs of, 150                                                        
               and substance abuse, 129                                             
                                                                                    
           physical neglect, 141-42                                                 
           physical state, a child’s, 81-82                                         
           physical symptoms:                                                       
                                                                                    
               of abuse and neglect, 140                                            
               of neglect, 149                                                      
               of sexual abuse, 152                                                 
                                                                                    
           play:                                                                    
               with a child in therapy, 72-73                                       
                                                                                    
               as language, 60                                                      
           policy, see agency procedure and policy                                  
           postpartum depression, 83                                                
                                                                                    
           premeditation, level of, and suicide, 123                                
           preparation:                                                             
                                                                                    
               of a client for psychological testing, 160-61                        
               for a first interview with a child, 61                               
               for meeting a potentially dangerous client, 109-10                   
                                                                                    
           presenting problem:                                                      
               definition of, by the therapist, 9                                   
               questions about, for a written assessment, 164                       
                                                                                    
               sample biopsychosocial assessment, 169                               
               timing of, 9                                                         
                                                                                    
           privacy, respect for the client’s, 9                                     
           problem, definition of, 56                                               
               by a caretaker, 65-66                                                
                                                                                    
               by family members, 49-50                                             
           problem-solving:

=== Page 196 (1 cols) ===
family’s capacity for, 51                                            
               suicide as a form of, 116, 120-21                                    
               a symptom as a solution, 46                                          
                                                                                    
           professional relationships, 173-74                                       
           projective tests, 155                                                    
                                                                                    
           protocol, agency for recording initial assessments, xii                  
           psychiatrist:                                                            
               assistance with a suicidal client, 122                               
                                                                                    
               guidance for the therapist, 35-36                                    
           psychological state:                                                     
                                                                                    
               mother’s, during pregnancy, 82                                       
               testing of, 155                                                      
           psychological testing, 153-61                                            
                                                                                    
           psychotropic medications, 40                                             
                                                                                    
           questions/questioning:                                                   
                                                                                    
               asking a client about suicidal ideation, 127                         
               for assessment of substance abuse, 133, 136-37                       
                                                                                    
               for assessment of the risk of suicide, 119-20, 126-27                
               to clarify with the supervisor, 3                                    
               a client’s, 9                                                        
                                                                                    
               for consideration of a couple’s relationships, 90-91                 
               for a developmental history, 85-86                                   
                                                                                    
               for gathering information about sexual abuse, 146-48                 
               initial, 8                                                           
               for interviewing a child, 66-67, 69, 73-74                           
                                                                                    
               for interviewing a couple, 95-97                                     
               medical history data, 43                                             
               about medication, 38                                                 
                                                                                    
               in observing family relationships, 48-49                             
               for reviewing a client’s physical health status, 35-36               
                                                                                    
               for reviewing medical information, 33                                
               skepticism of the prior record, 3-4                                  
               for suicidal clients, 119-20, 122-24, 126-27                         
                                                                                    
               who and what to ask, xii

=== Page 197 (1 cols) ===
race, and suicide, 113                                                   
           reasons:                                                                 
               for ordering tests, 156                                              
                                                                                    
               for substance abuse, 134                                             
               for suicidal ideation, 124                                           
                                                                                    
           recency of drug use, 131-32                                              
           recommendations, following testing, 158                                  
           record:                                                                  
                                                                                    
               client’s, components of, 3-4                                         
               of an interview, 4-5                                                 
                                                                                    
           referral sources for children, 59                                        
           reframing:                                                               
               of a couple’s relationship, 96                                       
                                                                                    
               in family interviews, 55-56                                          
               of the reasons for interviewing a child, 68                          
           relationship:                                                            
                                                                                    
               history of a couple’s, 95-96                                         
               improving a couple’s in therapy, 99-100                              
                                                                                    
               between mind and body, 32                                            
               parent-child, 79-80                                                  
               stage of a couple’s, 88-89                                           
                                                                                    
           reporting child abuse or neglect:                                        
               guidance and support sources, 140                                    
                                                                                    
               guidelines for, 147                                                  
           reports, writing an assessment, 162-71                                   
           risk:                                                                    
                                                                                    
               of abuse, 139                                                        
               of blaming or offending parents, 63-64                               
               of openness in therapy, 8-9                                          
                                                                                    
               to a therapist, minimizing, 109                                      
               to a therapist of violence, 102                                      
                                                                                    
               of violence, and the limits of confidentiality, 10                   
               see also abuse; safety; violence                                     
           rituals, compulsive, 24-25                                               
                                                                                    
           Rorschach test, 155

=== Page 198 (1 cols) ===
sadness, a child’s expression of, 118                                    
           safety:                                                                  
               of a child at risk for abuse, 139, 148                               
                                                                                    
               concern over danger from a client, 27, 101-11                        
               and confidentiality, 10, 75-76                                       
                                                                                    
               and a couple’s communication, 92                                     
               and individual interviews in family therapy, 57                      
               and physical neglect, 142                                            
                                                                                    
               procedures to protect staff from a client, 108                       
               see also abuse; risk; violence                                       
                                                                                    
           second opinion:                                                          
               on danger to a suicidal client, 121-22                               
               see also supervisor; treatment team                                  
                                                                                    
           secrets, family, 54-55                                                   
           self-destructive symptoms, 129                                           
           self-referral, 2                                                         
                                                                                    
           sensory perception:                                                      
               client’s, mental status exam, 15                                     
                                                                                    
               client’s, mental status exam questions, 30                           
           separation of parents and children in therapy, 69                        
           setting:                                                                 
                                                                                    
               for approaching a potentially dangerous client, 108-9                
               for interviewing children, 61-62                                     
                                                                                    
               office organization, 4                                               
           sexual abuse:                                                            
               assessment of children for, 138-51                                   
                                                                                    
               behavioral symptoms of, 152                                          
               physical signs of, 152                                               
           sexuality, questions about, in couple’s therapy, 99                      
                                                                                    
           shame in abused children, 146                                            
           significant findings on a test report, 157-58                            
                                                                                    
           somatic delusions, 24                                                    
           speech:                                                                  
               client’s, and the mental status exam, 15, 17-18                      
                                                                                    
               client’s, and the mental status exam questions, 29                   
           spokesperson for a family, 49

=== Page 199 (1 cols) ===
standardization of psychological tests, 154                              
           Stanford-Binet test, 155                                                 
           structure:                                                               
                                                                                    
               for couple’s therapy, 95-96                                          
               of interviews with children, 62-63                                   
                                                                                    
           substance abuse, 128-37                                                  
               and assessment of potential for violence, 106                        
               and suicide, 116                                                     
                                                                                    
               see also alcohol                                                     
           suicidal ideation, 25                                                    
                                                                                    
               definition of, 119-20                                                
           suicide, 112-27                                                          
               and substance abuse, 129                                             
                                                                                    
           suicide attempts:                                                        
               and assessment of potential for violence, 107                        
               and potential for suicide, 114, 116                                  
                                                                                    
           supervisor:                                                              
               expectations of, xii-xiii                                            
                                                                                    
               guidance from:                                                       
                   about family therapy, 57                                         
                   about note-taking and greeting, 5                                
                                                                                    
                   for meeting with a violent client, 109-10                        
                   in an imminent risk assessment, 148                              
                                                                                    
                   in assessment of potential for violence, 104                     
                   in child neglect, 144                                            
                   in interpreting a child’s drawings, 71                           
                                                                                    
               questions for, before the first interview, 3                         
           support system, patient’s, recording information about, 9                
           suspiciousness, assessment of, 104-5                                     
                                                                                    
           switchboard, familial, 54                                                
           symptoms:                                                                
                                                                                    
               family’s, 45-46                                                      
               of HIV, 42                                                           
               of physical disorder, and appearance of mental disorder, 34-35       
                                                                                    
               self-destructive, 129

=== Page 200 (1 cols) ===
systems theory as a basis for family therapy, 45                         
                                                                                    
           tangentiality, 21-22                                                     
                                                                                    
           temperament, innate, 83                                                  
           testing, constraints on, 160                                             
                                                                                    
           Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), 155                                    
           theoretical perspective, xv                                              
           therapist:                                                               
                                                                                    
               ability to manage suicidal behavior, 116-17                          
               adjustment to a client’s mode of expression, 93                      
                                                                                    
               anxiety of, xi                                                       
           approach to a potentially violent client, 107-8                          
               attributing own assumptions to a client, 16-17                       
                                                                                    
               client’s attitude toward, 27                                         
                   and the mental status exam, 15                                   
               comfort with clients’ expectations, 89                               
                                                                                    
               danger to, 101-2                                                     
               discussion of suicide with a client, 115                             
                                                                                    
               fear of violence, 111                                                
               feelings about a client’s characteristics, 27                        
               feelings about parents of a child client, 64                         
                                                                                    
               greeting a client, 5                                                 
               information about confidentiality, 10-11                             
                                                                                    
               as an information-gatherer, 50                                       
               introduction of, to the client, 6-7                                  
               knowledge of child development, 58                                   
                                                                                    
               need for information about medications, 40                           
               observation versus inferences by, 67-68                              
               preparation for an interview, 2-4                                    
                                                                                    
               questioning a client about substance abuse, 130-31                   
               questioning of the potential of a client for suicide, 126            
                                                                                    
               relationship with the client, xvi                                    
               role in first interview with a child, 72                             
               take-charge role in family interviews, 48-49                         
                                                                                    
               viewpoint of, and meaning of observations in a mental status, 21     
           therapy:

=== Page 201 (1 cols) ===
alliance with parents in, 68, 75                                     
               for couples, 87-100                                                  
               effect of intoxication on, 132                                       
                                                                                    
               family, 44-57                                                        
               family, reframing the problem in, 2                                  
                                                                                    
               group, for substance abuse, 129                                      
               see also treatment                                                   
           thought broadcasting, 23                                                 
                                                                                    
           thought process and content, client’s, 20-25                             
               and the mental status exam, 15, 29-30                                
                                                                                    
           time frame:                                                              
               for assessing a client, the place of the MSE, 14                     
               and assessment of potential for violence, 105                        
                                                                                    
               of potentially neglectful behavior, 142                              
               of substance abuse, 131                                              
               of suicidal thoughts, 120                                            
                                                                                    
               for viewing a child’s functioning, 79-80                             
           timing:                                                                  
                                                                                    
               of couples therapy, 91                                               
               of the presenting problem, 9                                         
               of therapy for children, 59                                          
                                                                                    
           toys for children in an interview, 62                                    
           tranquility in a suicidal client, 125                                    
                                                                                    
           treatment:                                                               
               description in a written assessment, 167-68                          
               individual, for substance abuse, 129                                 
                                                                                    
               plan for, in a written assessment, 168                               
               for substance abuse, 135                                             
               see also therapy                                                     
                                                                                    
           treatment team:                                                          
               discussion about suicidal clients, 124                               
                                                                                    
               evaluation of a client’s medications, 40-41                          
               guidance from:                                                       
                   and cooperation in diagnosis, 168                                
                                                                                    
                   in an imminent risk assessment, 148                              
                   in assessment of drug abuse, 132

=== Page 202 (1 cols) ===
in assessment of potential for violence, 104-5                   
                   in child neglect and abuse, 144                                  
                   in refusal of a family for joint therapy, 57                     
                                                                                    
               and the limits of confidentiality, 10                                
               psychologist as a member of, 153                                     
                                                                                    
               reporting consultation with, to a client, 11                         
           twelve-step programs, 129                                                
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           understanding, asking a client for clarification, 15                     
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
           Verbal Intelligence Quotient (I.Q.), 157                                 
           verbal tests:                                                            
               score versus performance I.Q. score, 157                             
                                                                                    
               Wechsler subtests, 155                                               
           violence:                                                                
               preoccupation with, 104-5                                            
                                                                                    
               and substance abuse, 129-30                                          
               threatened, in couple’s therapy, 94                                  
                                                                                    
           visual cues in a mental status exam, 17                                  
                                                                                    
           Wechsler tests, 155                                                      
                                                                                    
           what, see questions/questioning                                          
           when, see time frame; timing                                             
                                                                                    
           where, see questions/questioning; setting                                
           who, clients included in a first interview, 3                            
           why, see reasons                                                         
                                                                                    
           working alliance with parents, 68                                        
                                                                                    
           xenophobia, 25                                                           
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

=== Page 203 (1 cols) ===
Copyright © 1993 by Susan Lukas                      
                                                                                    
                                    All rights reserved.                            
                                                                                    
                              Printed in the United States of America.              
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                      First Edition                                 
                                                                                    
                   The text of this book was composed in Century. Composition by Bytheway
                     Typesetting Services, Inc. Manufacturing by Haddon Craftsmen, Inc.
                              Book design by Justine Burkat Trubey                  
                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                         Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data         
                                                                                    
           Lukas, Susan Ries.                                                       
              Where to start and what to ask : an assessment handbook / Susan Lukas.
               p. cm.                                                               
              “A Norton professional book.”                                         
                                                                                    
              ISBN 0-393-70148-4 (cloth) - ISBN 0-393-70152-2 (paper).              
              1. Interviewing in psychiatry. 2. Interviewing in mental health. I. Title.
              [DNLM: 1. Interview, Psychological-methods. 2. Psychological Tests-methods. WM 141
           L954w]                                                                   
           RC480.7.L85 1993                                                         
           158’.39-dc20                                                             
                                                                                    
           DNLM/DLC                                                                 
           for Library of Congress 92-49934 CIP                                     
                                                                                    
                   W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110
                   W.W. Norton & Company, Ltd., 10 Coptic Street, London WC1A 1PU 890
                                                                                    
                                   OceanofPDF.com

