=== Page 1 (1 cols) ===
PSYCHIATRIC          MENTAL        HEALTH                 
                                                             
   ASSESSMENT            AND      DIAGNOSIS          OF      
                                                             
   ADULTS      FOR     ADVANCED           PRACTICE           
                                                             
   MENTAL        HEALTH      NURSES                          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
   Kunsook                                                   
             S                                               
              .                                              
                Bernstein                                    
                          and  Robert  Kaplan

=== Page 2 (1 cols) ===
Psychiatric  Mental  Health  Assessment               
       and  Diagnosis  of Adults for Advanced                
                                                             
       Practice  Mental  Health  Nurses                      
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       This text provides a comprehensive and evidence-based introduction to psychiatric
       mental health assessment and diagnosis in advanced nursing practice.
         Taking a clinical, case-based approach, this textbook is designed to support
       graduate nursing students who are studying psychiatric mental health nursing as
       they develop their reasoning and decision-making skills. It presents:
                                                             
       ·· Therapeutic communication and psychiatric interviewing techniques,
          alongside basic psychiatric terminologies.         
       ·· The major psychiatric diagnoses, drawing on the DSM-5.
       ·· A step-by-step guide to conducting a comprehensive psychiatric mental
          health assessment.                                 
       ·· Case examples demonstrating assessment across major psychopathologies.
       ·· Good practice for conducting mental health evaluations.
       This is an essential text for all those undertaking psychiatric mental health nurse
       practitioner programs and a valuable reference for advanced practice nurses in
       clinical practice.                                    
                                                             
       Kunsook S. Bernstein is Professor Emerita at Hunter College School of Nursing,
       City University of New York, where she taught advanced psychiatric nurse prac-
       titioner students and coordinated the psychiatric mental health nurse practitioner
       program. Her primary area of research is Asian American immigrants’ mental
       health and healthcare disparities.                    
       Robert Kaplan is Advanced Senior Lecturer and Co-Principal Investigator
       of the Writing Research Lab in the Program in Writing and Rhetoric at Stony
       Brook University, State University of New York. He teaches research writing to
       advanced undergraduate STEM students and is a science editor for public health
       researchers.

=== Page 3 (1 cols) ===
Psychiatric      Mental     Health                    
                                                             
       Assessment       and    Diagnosis     of              
                                                             
       Adults     for  Advanced       Practice               
                                                             
       Mental     Health     Nurses                          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Kunsook    S. Bernstein and  Robert  Kaplan

=== Page 4 (1 cols) ===
Cover image: © Getty Images                         
         First published 2023                                
         by Routledge                                        
         4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
         and by Routledge                                    
         605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158                
         Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
         © 2023 Kunsook S. Bernstein and Robert Kaplan       
         The right of Kunsook S. Bernstein and Robert Kaplan to be identified as
         authors of this work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and
         78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.  
         All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
         utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
         known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
         any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
         from the publishers.                                
         Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
         registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation
         without intent to infringe.                         
         British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data     
         A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
         Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data  
         A catalog record has been requested for this book   
         ISBN: 978-0-367-68455-6 (hbk)                       
         ISBN: 978-0-367-68448-8 (pbk)                       
         ISBN: 978-1-003-13759-7 (ebk)                       
         DOI: 10.4324/9781003137597                          
         Typeset in Times New Roman                          
         By Deanta Global Publishing Services, Chennai, India

=== Page 5 (1 cols) ===
Dedicated to my husband, Steven, and to my mother,    
       Bong-Suk Koo, to my children, Joseph and Beth, and to my
       grandchildren, Catherine, Peter, and Jacob            
       -Kunsook S. Bernstein                                 
                                                             
       Dedicated to my parents, Harold and Lore W. Kaplan    
       -Robert Kaplan

=== Page 6 (1 cols) ===
Contents                                              
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
          List of Figures                          ix        
          List of Tables                           x         
          List of Boxes                            xii       
                                                             
       Introduction                                1         
          Reference 2                                        
                                                             
       1  Therapeutic Interviewing and Mental Health Evaluation of Adults 3
          Section 1: Principles of Therapeutic Interviewing 3
          Section 2: Guidelines of Mental Health Evaluation 11
          Section 3: Case Exemplar 15                        
          Section 4: Psychiatric Terminology 16              
          References 21                                      
                                                             
       2  Case-Based Differential Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation
          for Adults                               22        
          Section 1: Schizophrenia 22                        
          Section 2: Depressive Disorders 35                 
          Section 3: Bipolar Disorders 48                    
          Section 4: Anxiety Disorders 59                    
          Section 5: Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders 68
          Section 6: Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders 76
          Section 7: Feeding and Eating Disorders 87         
          Section 8: Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders 96
          Section 9: Neurocognitive Disorders 110            
          Section 10: Personality Disorders 123              
          References 132

=== Page 7 (1 cols) ===
viii Contents                                       
         3 Practice Guidelines for the Assessment of Risk for Violent
           Behaviors during the Psychiatric Evaluation 135   
           Section 1: Assessment of Suicidal Clients 136     
           Section 2: Assessment of Other-Directed Violence, including
              Aggressive Behaviors and Homicide 145          
           References 150                                    
                                                             
         4 Practice Guidelines for Cultural Assessments 152  
                                                             
           Index                                   159

=== Page 8 (1 cols) ===
Figures                                               
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       2.1 Cortical glutamate regulated dopamine neurons in two possible ways 27
       2.2 Neurobiological model of obsessive-compulsive disorder 71

=== Page 9 (1 cols) ===
Tables                                              
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         1.1 Therapeutic Communication Techniques and Examples 5
         1.2 Glossary of Terms                      17       
         2.1 Symptom Categories of Schizophrenia    23       
         2.2 Dopamine Neurotransmitter Pathways and Level of Dopamine
            Resulting Symptoms of Schizophrenia     26       
         2.3 “Do” and “Do Not” Question Examples in Dealing with a Client
            with Delusions                          30       
         2.4 Differential Diagnosis among Depressive Disorders in Adults
            Based on Duration                       35       
         2.5 Nine Symptom Criteria of Major Depressive Disorder and
            Associated Brain Regions Listed in the DSM-5 38  
         2.6 Three Key Neurotransmitters’ Projection Pathways Associated
            with Symptoms of Depression             39       
         2.7 Psychological Systems Linked to DSM-5 Diagnostic Symptoms
            and Recommended Clinician Approaches    41       
         2.8 Differential Diagnostic Criteria among Bipolar Disorders 51
         2.9 Diagnostic Symptom Criteria of Bipolar Disorder and Associated
            Brain Regions                           52       
         2.10 Anxiety Disorder Diagnostic Classification 60  
         2.11 Anxiety Disorder–Associated Symptoms Malfunctioning in Brain
            Regions and Circuits                    61       
         2.12 Differential Diagnosis of Common Medical Conditions
            Mimicking Anxiety                       62       
         2.13 Symptom Patterns of Obsessions and Compulsions 69
         2.14 Differential Diagnosis among Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders 77
         2.15 Symptoms of PTSD in Brain Regions and Circuits 80
         2.16 Differential Diagnosis among Feeding and Eating Disorders 88
         2.17 Indications of High Medical Risk and Inpatient Treatment 89
         2.18 Summary of Neurobiological Findings in Eating Disorders 89
         2.19 Diagnostic Criteria of Pathological Pattern of Symptoms and
            Behaviors Related to Substance Use Disorder 98   
         2.20 Alcohol and Its Medical Complications 110

=== Page 10 (1 cols) ===
Tables xi      
       2.21 Differential Diagnostic Features between NCD with Etiological
           Subtypes and Delirium                  111        
       2.22 Neurocognitive Domain and Symptom Examples 112   
       2.23 Etiological Subtype Specifier: Degenerative vs. Nondegenerative
           Types                                  113        
       2.24 DSM-5 Modified Diagnostic Criteria for Major and Mild
           Neurocognitive Disorders               114        
       2.25 Differentiation between Major and Minor Neurocognitive
           Disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease (AD) 115      
       2.26 Pathological and Clinical Features of Degenerative
           Neurocognitive Disorders               115        
       2.27 Rationale for NCD due to AD Diagnostic Criteria Matching with
           the Client’s Symptoms                  121        
       2.28 General Characteristics of Specific Personality Disorders 124

=== Page 11 (1 cols) ===
Boxes                                               
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         2.1 Neurobiological Theories of Schizophrenia 24    
         2.2 Neurobiological Theories of Depressive Disorders 37
         2.3 Neurobiological Theories of Bipolar Disorder 52 
         2.4 Neurobiological Theories of Anxiety Disorders 61
         2.5 Neurobiological Theories of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 70
         2.6 Neurobiological Theories of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder 80
         2.7 Neurobiological Findings on Eating Disorders 89 
         2.8 Neurobiological Bases of Substance-Related Disorders 98

=== Page 12 (1 cols) ===
Introduction                                          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Advanced psychiatric mental health nursing (APMHN) emerged as a graduate-
       level nursing specialization in the late 1950s, after the passage of the National
       Mental Health Act of 1946 and the creation of the National Institute of Mental
       Health in 1949, which has led to many advancements in mental health evaluation
       and treatment. While initially APMHNs were trained to practice autonomously,
       the degree has also evolved to prepare them to assess mental health problems, diag-
       nose psychiatric disorders, and provide treatment independently. Concurrently,
       psychiatric treatment itself has shifted in its understanding of mental health dis-
       orders, from a psychodynamic basis to one that incorporates neurobiology, with
       the concomitant development of efficacious psychotropic medications. With
       the advancement of psychopharmacology, the role of the APMHN has further
       evolved to encompass the expanding biopsychosocial perspective, and the com-
       petencies required to practice have kept congruent with the emerging science.
       Consequently, many psychiatric mental health graduate nursing programs have
       modified their curricula to include greater emphasis on comprehensive mental
       and physical health problems, and on the professional competencies necessary for
       prescriptive authority (American Nurses Association, 2014).
         This book is designed to assist APMHN students and early-career APMHNs
       to advance their competencies by explaining and demonstrating the steps required
       to conduct a comprehensive psychiatric mental health assessment, as well as to
       formulate the initial diagnosis of adults with psychiatric disorders, both of which
       are critical to the role of the APMHN. The book takes an incremental approach
       to guide its readers through this entire process of mental health assessment and
       diagnosis, but it does not focus on the treatment that would follow.
         Fundamental to nursing philosophy is caring. Consequently, Chapter 1 explores
       the principles and guidelines of therapeutic interviewing, as it is through thera-
       peutic communication that APMHNs demonstrate their understanding of their cli-
       ents. The chapters that follow examine more specific applications of assessment
       and diagnosis to different mental health situations. Chapter 2 presents case-based
       differential diagnostic mental health evaluations and the neurobiology of mental
       illness, as to effectively prescribe medications to treat clients with mental illness
       it is essential that APMHNs be competent and knowledgeable about the neuro-
       biological basis of mental disorders upon which psychopharmacology is based. In
                                   DOI: 10.4324/9781003137597-1

=== Page 13 (1 cols) ===
2 Introduction                                      
         fact, a separate course on psychopharmacology should be considered as part of
         the academic degree program; if one is not available, APMHNs should master
         the equivalent, whether or not it is required by each state’s regulatory system.
         Chapter 3 provides practice guidelines for the assessment of high-risk behaviors,
         and Chapter 4 provides practice guidelines for cultural assessments.
                                                             
         Reference                                           
         American Nurses Association. (2014). Scope and standard of psychiatric-mental health
          practice (2nd ed.). American Nurses Association. ISBN: 978155810555

=== Page 14 (1 cols) ===
1    Therapeutic  Interviewing  and                   
            Mental  Health  Evaluation  of Adults            
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Section 1: Principles of Therapeutic Interviewing     
                                                             
       Therapeutic interviewing is the craft by which the advanced psychiatric mental
       health nurse (APMHN) attempts to clearly understand their clients. It can be an
       instrument of healing for individuals who are in both physical and psychologi-
       cal need, and therefore is an essential skill for APMHNs to learn and apply. It
       involves the use of verbal and nonverbal messages during the interview by tai-
       loring the nurse’s verbal skills to suit the unique physical and emotional needs
       of the client, as they are revealed. The aim is to establish a professional thera-
       peutic nurse–client relationship that engages the client with the healing process.
       Consequently, the role of the APMHN, especially when interviewing a client for
       the initial psychiatric evaluation, goes beyond simply information gathering.
         In this section of the chapter, the underlying principles of therapeutic inter-
       viewing are discussed. These principles, which may determine whether an initial
       interview fails or succeeds, are not rigid; instead, they provide flexible guide-
       lines, discussed in the next section, within a structured framework that enable
       the interviewer to create a warm and safe atmosphere appropriate to the circum-
       stances. The first encounter with the mental health clinician can be the beginning
       of the healing process for many clients seeking mental health services. Therefore,
       engaging in therapeutic interviewing while collecting pertinent clinical data, such
       as physical, mental, and emotional status, and conducting needs assessments is an
       art, and one necessary for the APMHN to be masterful in, to effectively promote
       their clients’ healing.                               
         Each interview may vary depending on the purpose, location, time allocation,
       and other circumstances. For example, an APMHN may interview a client who
       is scheduled for their initial psychiatric assessment and treatment at an allocated
       time in an outpatient clinic, or they may be assessing and interviewing a client in
       the emergency room for a psychiatric crisis. At other times, an APMHN may be
       called to evaluate a client in a general hospital or long-term care facility on a con-
       sultative basis, or they may work regularly in a psychiatric hospital conducting
       daily assessments and longer-term treatments of assigned clients. Yet, regardless
       of the context, to provide an effective interview during the psychiatric mental
       health assessment, an APMHN must have a broad sense of the assessment goals.
                                   DOI: 10.4324/9781003137597-2

=== Page 15 (1 cols) ===
4 Mental Health Evaluation of Adults                
         These goals will be explained in more detail in the Case Exemplar section of this
         chapter, but are presented briefly here for the reader to have a broad understanding
         of interview dynamics, as delineated by Shea (1998a), even though the different
         contexts within which an interview may occur, as noted above, may lead to cer-
         tain goals being more important or more achievable than others in any particular
         interview or interview setting:                     
                                                             
          1. To establish a sound engagement of the client in a therapeutic alliance.
          2. To collect a valid database.                    
          3. To develop an evolving and compassionate understanding of the client.
          4. To develop an assessment from which a tentative diagnosis can be made.
          5. To develop an appropriate disposition and treatment plan.
          6. To effect some decrease of anxiety in the client.
          7. To instill hope and ensure that the client will return for the next appointment.
         In addition, the APMHN must also have an awareness of the characteristics of
         a successful therapeutic relationship between clinician and client, whether that
         relationship consists of a single meeting or a series of meetings. Johnson and
         Vanderhoef (2016) defined those characteristics as genuine, empathetic, authen-
         tic, respectful, nonjudgmental, accepting, and maintaining professional bound-
         aries. Ultimately, then, to formulate a mental health assessment and diagnosis
         through a skillful interview, the APMHN needs to be clear about the assessment
         goals, knowledgeable about the characteristics of therapeutic communication
         techniques, and cognizant of psychiatric terminology.
          This section uses a case scenario to explore the core issues challenging
         APMHNs during mental health assessments. Based on the principles of therapeu-
         tic communication to interview clients with psychiatric disorders, the focus here
         is on the interactional process whereby APMHNs use commonly known thera-
         peutic communication techniques, noted in Table 1.1, to build rapport with each
         client, while formulating a comprehensive mental health assessment, which leads
         to diagnosis. Finally, the chapter concludes with a glossary of common psychi-
         atric terminology with which the APMHN must be familiar to write the formal
         assessment.                                         
          As the clinical interview constitutes an interactive relationship between a clini-
         cian and client, formulating a structure for it benefits both parties by creating a
         naturally occurring flow that allows the clinician to focus on guiding the interview
         in an efficient manner (Shea, 1998). This structure is highlighted in this section
         through three phases: (1) engagement, (2) valid data collection, and (3) closing
         of the interview. It is important to note that these phases do not always form a
         distinct progression; rather, the clinician can go back and forth between them as
         deemed necessary, based upon cues from the client, to successfully establish a
         rapport and to gather the necessary information.    
          The clinical case scenario presented below weaves between each phase by
         using therapeutic communication techniques with clear interview goals to begin
         to establish the characteristics of a therapeutic relationship, while collecting

=== Page 16 (1 cols) ===
Mental Health Evaluation of Adults 5
                                                             
       Table 1.1 Therapeutic Communication Techniques and Examples
                                                             
       Technique      Example                                
       Accepting      “What you said makes sense.” Nodding.  
       Broad openings “Is there anything you would like to talk about?”
       Clarifying information “I’m not sure I follow what you are trying to say.”
       Consensual validation “Tell me whether my understanding of it agrees with
                        yours.”                              
       Encouraging comparison “Was it something like …?”     
       Encouraging expression “Does this add to your stress?”
       Exploring      “Tell me more about that.”             
       Formulating a plan of action “What would you do to channel your anger constructively?”
       General leads  “Go on,” “And then?”                   
       Making observations “You seem to be tense.”           
       Offering self  “I will stay with you for a while.”    
       Placing event in time or “What seems to lead up to …?”
         sequence                                            
       Restating      Client: “I can’t sleep, staying up all night.” Nurse: “You
                        have difficulty sleeping.”           
       Seeking information “I would like to hear from you your perspective about how
                        you have been feeling and what’s been going on.”
       Silence        Nurse provides time for the client to put feelings into
                        words, to regain composure, or to continue talking.
       Source: Adapted from Belleza (2020).                  
       pertinent data to formulate a diagnosis of a mental disorder, ending with a docu-
       mentation of a mental health evaluation.              
       Phase 1: Engagement                                   
       Therapeutic engagement is an interpersonal process in which a clinician aims to
       develop a particular type of personal relationship with the client in the first, and
       potentially only, session. Its purposes include assessing the client, developing a
       shared understanding of the contents of the discussion, and planning how to man-
       age the client’s experience of the interview. Engagement skills are then further
       used to develop a therapeutic relationship (Walker, 2014). As the initial contact
       for psychiatric evaluation can be highly anxiety producing for clients, the goal of
       the interviewer during this phase is relatively simple: decrease the client’s anxiety
       and establish a sound engagement of the client in a therapeutic alliance using the
       therapeutic skills of genuineness, acceptance, and empathy. The client will form
       an initial impression of the APMHN and of the therapeutic encounter based on
       the APMHN’s attitude, mood, and verbal and nonverbal presentations during this
       phase; therefore, the APMHN should be aware of their own comfort in interacting
       with the client, and be mindful of any triggers evoking either positive or negative
       emotional reactions.                                  
         The following is an example of the engagement phase during the client–APMHN
       initial psychiatric evaluation interview scenario, accompanied by an analysis.

=== Page 17 (1 cols) ===
6 Mental Health Evaluation of Adults                
          The APMHN is working in a mental health outpatient clinic, and a new client
         is in the waiting room, scheduled for an initial psychiatric evaluation. Following
         clinic policy, the APMHN walks to the waiting room, greets the client, and the
         two walk back to the APHMN’s office. While in the waiting room, the client
         completed a personal demographic information form (name, sex, age, refer-
         ral source, insurance information, contact person, etc.), which they give to the
         clinician.                                          
         APMHN: (smiling warmly and spontaneously) Hi, my name is Peter Smith. I am
           a psychiatric nurse practitioner, and you have an appointment with me today
           for evaluation. (Upon arrival to the office.) Please have a seat and make your-
           self comfortable (the APMHN waits until the client sits down before sitting
           down, as a sign of courteousness).                
                                                             
         Comments: This is a simple and common verbal introduction scenario of the
         engagement process. However, the APMHN’s body language, gestures, and tone
         of voice give a first impression to the client as to whether or not the clinician is
         genuine and respectful.                             
                                                             
         Client: Thank you (avoiding eye contact and looking down to the floor).
         APMHN: (Observing the client’s body language and facial expression, asks a
           question in a soft tone of voice.) Do you have any preference as to how I
           should call you? Is it “Ms. Larson” or “Jane” or something else?
         Comments: By acknowledging the client’s cultural background and personal pref-
         erence, this question allows the client to feel respected and empowered.
                                                             
         Client: Call me “Jane” (still not making eye contact).
         APMHN: OK, Jane, since this is our first meeting, maybe you can tell me about
           yourself and what brought you here today?         
                                                             
         Comments: This broad opening question guides the client to share personal mat-
         ters and to determine which ones to share (seeking information). It is a commonly
         used phrase which turns the interview over to the client.
         Client: My family thinks I am depressed and need to see someone.
         APMHN: I see. … What do you think? I would like to hear from you about your
           perspective as to how you have been feeling and what’s going on.
                                                             
         Comments: The APMHN encourages the client to express and elaborate on her
         feelings and thoughts in her own words.             
                                                             
         Client: I don’t know (pause). I guess I have been down for a while since I broke
           up with my boyfriend … (hesitant tone).           
         APMHN: Go on (said gently, leading the client to continue).

=== Page 18 (1 cols) ===
Mental Health Evaluation of Adults 7
       Comments: The APMHN’s observation of the client’s behaviors (avoiding eye
       contact, short sentence answers, and hesitation to talk) indicates that the client is
       reluctant to engage in the conversation. Therefore, the APMHN is using gentle
       leading to give the client room to engage at her own pace.
                                                             
       Client: Things have been rough since then. … Even though I am the one who
          broke up with him, I miss him, but the thought of getting back together makes
          me sick. So I don’t know what to do and I did not want to say anything to my
          mother but she knew something was not right.       
       APMHN: (Silence, while allowing the client to continue.)
       Comments: Since the client is slowly but slightly more engaged in sharing her
       story, silence is appropriate for the APMHN. At the same time, the APMHN
       assesses the initial mental health status of the client:
       ·· Reason that the client is presenting for evaluation: Difficulty coping following
          the break-up with the boyfriend.                   
       ·· Psychiatric symptoms: Anxiety manifested by feelings of helplessness and
          loneliness.                                        
                                                             
       The engagement phase, including the client’s initial impression of the APMHN,
       represents the most critical arena for establishing rapport. In this case scenario, the
       APMHN applies therapeutic communication skills to establish a sound engage-
       ment with the client with the goal of creating a therapeutic alliance. Once the
       APMHN is aware of the client’s core pains and needs, and sees signs of the cli-
       ent’s readiness to engage in the interview, the APMHN should prepare to enter the
       valid data collection phase of mental health assessment by easing into gathering
       pertinent clinical information while skillfully engaging the client.
         The next scenario continues the interview by demonstrating how the APMHN
       skillfully applies several therapeutic skills during the transition to Phase 2—the
       examination of the client’s mental status and the collection of clinical data—to
       enable the client to feel more comfortable opening up.
       Client: I know getting back with him is not good for me the way things were with
          him, but he has been in my mind 24/7 (24 hours a day and 7 days a week)
          since the break-up. I can’t sleep or eat, and I’m crying frequently … (sob-
          bing). It’s hard for me to talk about it to anyone.
       APMHN: (Offers her a tissue.) Sounds like it’s difficult for you to talk about it, and
          you have been suffering all alone. I am glad that you are able to open yourself
          up now. When did you break up with him and what triggered the break-up?
       Comments: Several therapeutic skills are applied here while assessing the client’s
       presenting signs and symptoms:                        
                                                             
       ·· Restating and validating: “Sounds like it’s difficult for you to talk about it,
          and you have been suffering all alone.”

=== Page 19 (1 cols) ===
8 Mental Health Evaluation of Adults                
         ·· Encouraging expression: “I am glad that you are able to open yourself up now.”
         ·· Seeking information: “When did you break up with him and what triggered
           the break-up?” This question gathers information about how long the client
           has been suffering and the nature of the trauma (as a result of the break-up).
         ·· Clinical data: Tearful affect with sad mood, sleep and appetite disturbances,
           thoughts preoccupied with the break-up.           
                                                             
         Client: Well … 6 months ago, I found out accidently that he was seeing my best
           friend for over a year behind my back (crying uncontrollably). I am sorry
           (wiping her tears).                               
         APMHN: It’s ok, no need to apologize, if this is the first time you are talking
           about this, it can be very painful to rehash. But at least you are able to talk
           about it, which can be the beginning of healing. You mentioned earlier that
           you can’t sleep or eat; would you share with me what other problems you
           have experienced since the episode, like how it has affected your mood,
           social life, work, self-image, things like that?  
         Comments: The APMHN makes an effort to create a supportive atmosphere by
         validating the client’s feelings with positive reinforcement, which can be condu-
         cive to help the client feel safe enough to begin sharing freely. At the same time,
         the APMHN attempts to gather factual data about the client’s thinking, feeling,
         and behavior.                                       
         Client: Initially, I was angry, so angry that I felt like literally jumping out of my
           skin. But I did not say anything to him other than breaking up with him. For a
           while, I felt numb, nothing mattered, I had a hard time concentrating at work
           and not talking to anyone … (pause).              
         APMHN: Sounds like you have been through a lot. How are you feeling now?
                                                             
         Comments: Open-ended question leading the client to continue and focus her feel-
         ings at the present time.                           
                                                             
         Client: Well … before I came here, I did not know what to expect, but talking
           about what happened is not as bad as I thought. … You asked me how I feel
           now, I had a knot in my stomach while waiting in the waiting room, but it’s
           gone … strange … Sorry, I am rambling.            
         APMHN: Glad to hear that you got rid of that knot in your stomach (smiling).
           You seem to be at ease talking about what you have been bottling up inside.
           Let me ask you some concrete questions and please let me know if any topic
           makes you feel uncomfortable. Starting with your sleep and appetite, how
           many hours do you sleep at night? And have you lost any weight?
         Comments: The APMHN invests effort in creating an atmosphere that is optimally
         conducive for the client to feel safe to begin sharing her problems, and the client is

=== Page 20 (1 cols) ===
Mental Health Evaluation of Adults 9
       able to wander freely to whatever topic naturally occurs. Once the client becomes
       more engaged, the APMHN focuses on content, gathering factual data, including
       risk factors like suicidality.                        
                                                             
       Phase 2: Valid Data Collection of Client’s Mental Status
                                                             
       In this phase, a clinician conducts a mental health assessment while collecting
       valid client information to determine what content should be included in it.
       This is done by asking the client questions that elucidate what they mean by the
       terminology that they use. The clinician needs to elicit and record behavioral
       facts, not simply the client’s self-assessment of their conditions. For example,
       when a client comes in saying “I’m depressed,” elucidate specifics with ques-
       tions such as:                                        
       ·· What do you mean when you say you are depressed?   
       ·· How do you recognize when you are depressed compared to when you are
          not?                                               
       ·· What changes indicate to you that you are depressed?
                                            (Doran, 2013)    
                                                             
       A mental health assessment contains two parts (Sadock & Sadock, 2010):
        1. Psychiatric History: A record of the client’s psychiatric history, so that the
          APMHN can understand the client better. Taking a thorough history enables
          the APMHN to make an accurate diagnosis and formulate an effective treat-
          ment plan.                                         
        2. Mental Status Examination: A description of the client’s appearance,
          speech, actions, and thoughts, using a systematic format for recording find-
          ings about the client’s thinking, feeling, and behavior. A client’s history
          remains fixed, whereas their mental status can change during the interview,
          and these changes can be observable.               
                                                             
       For example, during the engagement phase, the APMHN also starts to collect the
       following data for the same client’s mental status:   
       ·· Appearance: Appeared to be the stated age, neatly groomed, wearing T-shirt
          and jeans, good hygiene.                           
       ·· Speech: Soft spoken, logical, and rational.        
       ·· Mood: Sad and depressed.                           
       ·· Affect: Tearful and mood congruent.                
                                                             
       One of the common problems facing the novice APMHN is to determine which
       information in a full intake assessment is important, and how to prioritize urgent
       matters depending on the setting: emergency room for crisis intervention, hospital

=== Page 21 (1 cols) ===
10 Mental Health Evaluation of Adults               
         triage setting to determine the level of treatment, or outpatient setting for evalu-
         ation and treatment. In the emergency room or triage settings, the APMHN will
         only meet with the client once for a limited period of time, and therefore needs
         to conduct a highly structured interview with the goal of drawing a diagnostic
         impression and creating initial treatment plans. However, if the APMHN intends
         to see the client numerous times in an outpatient setting, then less data needs to be
         collected in the first interview, since further sessions are available before a treat-
         ment plan is created. Therefore, the APMHN’s approach can be less structured
         and more relaxed, while collecting valid data to determine clinical impressions or
         possible diagnosis.                                 
                                                             
         Phase 3: Closing of the Interview                   
         Upon gathering sufficient data within the given time frame to determine the initial
         diagnosis and treatment plan, the APMHN will end the session by closing the
         interview, which consists of the actual closing words and gestures of the APMHN
         and of the client. Regardless of whether or not the APMHN will be seeing the cli-
         ent again, the APMHN should continue to be mindful of being warm and genuine
         rather than formal. The APHMN should also pay increased attention to the actions
         of the client at closing, as these may produce valuable information, especially if
         the APMHN will be seeing the client again. Shea (1998) claims that the closing
         of the interview may function as a mini-loss to the client. The client may respond
         with betrayal behaviors to such loss phenomenon, suggesting dependent feelings
         and difficulties with separation. These behaviors may be early signs of more far-
         reaching psychodynamic processes.                   
          The final scenario presents the closing of the interview between the same client
         and the APMHN, and is followed by an analysis.      
         Client: I am glad that I came to see you today. I did not know what to expect, but
           I feel better after talking to you. Thank you.    
         APMHN: I am also glad that you sought help by coming to see me and that I was
           able to help. By the way, what was it about talking to me that helped you?
                                                             
         Comments: The client expressed appreciation (may view as dependence) as well
         as uncertainty. Since the betrayal by the boyfriend was the core issue, the APMHN
         should be keenly aware of psychodynamic processes, such as transference and
         countertransference, and maintain professional boundaries with the client.
         Client: I don’t know, just the way you allowed me to be myself, you did not judge
           me, and also, you were very patient with me. I felt like you understood my
           pain. … I did not even realize at the time that I was pouring my guts out. It’s
           very unusual for me to do that to someone I’ve met for the first time.
         APMHN: I am glad that I was helpful to you. It seems that you are ready to accept
           help and I am glad that you came today. Since we already talked about your

=== Page 22 (1 cols) ===
Mental Health Evaluation of Adults 11
          diagnosis and treatment plan, do you have any questions? And is it OK if we
          meet weekly for a while?                           
                                                             
       Comments: In the context of an initial mental health assessment of the client, the
       APMHN is required to create a record of the client’s psychiatric evaluation, with a
       major goal being to identify signs and symptoms of psychiatric disorders, includ-
       ing other medical conditions that could affect the accuracy of a psychiatric diag-
       nosis, as well as risk factors, such as suicidal, homicidal, or aggressive behaviors.
       Additional goals relate to identifying factors that could positively influence the
       therapeutic alliance, enhance clinical decision-making, enable safe and appropri-
       ate treatment planning, and promote better treatment outcomes. Finally, the initial
       psychiatric evaluation is the start of a dialogue between the APMHN and the
       client about many concerns, such as diagnosis and treatment options, and collabo-
       rative decision-making, including treatment-related decisions, as well as coordi-
       nation of psychiatric treatment with other clinicians who may be involved in the
       client’s care. These goals, which were delineated earlier, are all met by the end of
       the interview (Shea, 1998):                           
       ·· Establish a sound engagement of the client in a therapeutic alliance.
       ·· Collect a valid database.                          
       ·· Develop an evolving and compassionate understanding of the client.
       ·· Effect some decrease of anxiety in the client.     
       ·· Instill hope and ensure that the client will return for the next appointment.
       ·· Develop an assessment from which a tentative diagnosis can be made.
       ·· Develop an appropriate disposition and treatment plan.
                                                             
       Section 2: Guidelines of Mental Health Evaluation     
       In general, mental health assessment involves a structured interview with the cli-
       ent which depends on many factors, such as the client’s ability to communicate,
       degree of cooperation, illness severity, and ability to recall historical details.
       Additional factors, such as past trauma (physical or sexual assault), different cul-
       tural backgrounds, primary language used, and mental health literacy, can influ-
       ence the client’s ability to establish trust within the therapeutic relationship. The
       APMHN’s flexibility also may be needed to frame questions in a clearer manner.
       For example, during a mental health evaluation of a client with severe psycho-
       sis or dementia, obtaining information on psychiatric symptoms and history may
       not be possible through a structured interview with direct questioning (American
       Psychiatric Association [APA], 2016). In other words, during the mental health
       assessment, the APMHN should not be focused on following a rigid interview
       format but rather on formulating an appropriate structure that may even need to be
       adjusted as the assessment proceeds to guide the client and promote an effective
       therapeutic interview, while obtaining whatever needed clinical data is possible to
       obtain within a given time frame.

=== Page 23 (1 cols) ===
12 Mental Health Evaluation of Adults               
          The APA (2016) delineates Practice Guidelines for the Psychiatric Evaluation
         of Adults as follows:                               
                                                             
          1. History of Present Illness                      
           ·· Reason that the patient is presenting for evaluation.
           ·· Psychiatric review of systems, including anxiety symptoms and panic
              attacks.                                       
           ·· Past or current sleep abnormalities, including sleep apnea.
           ·· Impulsivity.                                   
          2. Psychiatric History                             
           ·· Past and current psychiatric diagnoses.        
           ·· Prior psychotic or aggressive ideas, including thoughts of physical or
              sexual aggression or homicide.                 
           ·· Prior aggressive behaviors (e.g., homicide, domestic or workplace vio-
              lence, other physically or sexually aggressive threats or acts).
           ·· Prior suicidal ideas, suicide plans, and suicide attempts, including
              aborted or interrupted ones, as well as details of each attempt (e.g., con-
              text, method, damage, potential lethality, intent).
           ·· Prior intentional self-injury in which there was no suicide intent.
           ·· History of psychiatric hospitalization and/or emergency department vis-
              its for psychiatric issues.                    
           ·· Past psychiatric treatments (type, duration, and, where applicable, doses).
           ·· Response to past psychiatric treatments.       
           ·· Adherence to past and current pharmacological and nonpharmacological
              psychiatric treatments.                        
          3. Substance Use History                           
           ·· Use of tobacco, alcohol, and other substances (e.g., marijuana, cocaine,
              heroin, hallucinogens) and any misuse of prescribed or over-the-counter
              medications or supplements.                    
           ·· Current or recent substance use disorders or change in use of alcohol or
              other substances.                              
          4. Medical History                                 
           ·· Allergies or drug sensitivities.               
           ·· All medications the patient is currently or recently taking and any side
              effects (i.e., both prescribed and nonprescribed medications, herbal and
              nutritional supplements, and vitamins).        
           ·· Whether or not the patient has an ongoing relationship with a primary
              healthcare professional.                       
           ·· Past or current medical illnesses and related hospitalizations.
           ·· Relevant past or current treatments, including surgeries, other proce-
              dures, or complementary and alternative medical treatments.
           ·· Past or current neurological or neurocognitive disorders or symptoms.
           ·· Physical trauma, including head injuries.      
           ·· Sexual and reproductive history.               
           ·· Cardiopulmonary status.

=== Page 24 (1 cols) ===
Mental Health Evaluation of Adults 13
          ·· Past or current endocrinological disease.       
          ·· Past or current infectious disease, including sexually transmitted dis-
            eases, HIV, tuberculosis, hepatitis C, and locally endemic infectious dis-
            eases, such as Lyme disease.                     
          ·· Past or current symptoms or conditions associated with significant pain
            and discomfort.                                  
        5. Review of Systems                                 
          ·· Psychiatric (if not already included with history of present illness).
          ·· Constitutional symptoms (e.g., fever, weight loss).
          ·· Eyes.                                           
          ·· Ears, nose, mouth, throat.                      
          ·· Cardiovascular.                                 
          ·· Respiratory.                                    
          ·· Gastrointestinal.                               
          ·· Genitourinary.                                  
          ·· Musculoskeletal.                                
          ·· Integumentary (skin and/or breast).             
          ·· Neurological.                                   
          ·· Endocrine.                                      
          ·· Hematological/lymphatic.                        
          ·· Allergic/immunological.                         
        6. Family History                                    
          ·· History of suicidal behaviors in biological relatives (for patients with
            current suicidal ideas).                         
          ·· History of violent behaviors in biological relatives (for patients with cur-
            rent aggressive ideas).                          
        7. Personal and Social History                       
          ·· Presence of psychosocial stressors (e.g., financial, housing, legal, school/
            occupational, or interpersonal/relationship problems; lack of social sup-
            port; painful, disfiguring, or terminal medical illness).
          ·· Review of the patient’s trauma history.         
          ·· Exposure to violence or aggressive behavior, including combat exposure
            or childhood abuse.                              
          ·· Legal or disciplinary consequences of past aggressive behaviors.
          ·· Cultural factors related to the patient’s social environment.
          ·· Personal/cultural beliefs and cultural explanations of psychiatric illness.
          ·· Patient’s need for an interpreter.              
        8. Mental Status Examination                         
          ·· General appearance and nutritional status.      
          ·· Height, weight, and body mass index (BMI).      
          ·· Vital signs.                                    
          ·· Skin, including any stigmata of trauma, self-injury, or drug use.
          ·· Coordination and gait.                          
          ·· Involuntary movements or abnormalities of motor tone.
          ·· Sight and hearing.

=== Page 25 (1 cols) ===
14 Mental Health Evaluation of Adults               
           ·· Speech, including fluency and articulation.    
           ·· Mood, level of anxiety, thought content and process, and perception and
              cognition.                                     
           ·· Hopelessness.                                  
           ·· Current suicidal ideas, suicide plans, and suicide intent, including active
              or passive thoughts of suicide or death.       
           ·· If current suicidal ideas are present, assess: 
              ·· Patient’s intended course of action if current symptoms worsen.
              ·· Access to suicide methods, including firearms.
              ·· Patient’s possible motivations for suicide (e.g., attention or reaction
                from others, revenge, shame, humiliation, delusional guilt, com-
                mand hallucinations).                        
              ·· Reasons for living (e.g., sense of responsibility to children or others,
                religious beliefs).                          
              ·· Quality and strength of the therapeutic alliance.
           ·· Current aggressive or psychotic ideas, including thoughts of physical or
              sexual aggression or homicide.                 
           ·· If current aggressive ideas are present, assess:
              ·· Specific individuals or groups toward whom homicidal or aggres-
                sive ideas or behaviors have been directed in the past or at present.
              ·· Impulsivity, including anger management issues.
              ·· Access to firearms.                         
          9. Impression and Plan                             
           ·· Documentation of an estimate of the patient’s suicide risk, including fac-
              tors influencing risk.                         
           ·· Documentation of an estimated risk of aggressive behavior (including
              homicide), including factors influencing risk. 
           ·· Quantitative measures of symptoms, level of functioning, and quality
              of life.                                       
           ·· Documentation of the rationale for treatment selection, including discus-
              sion of the specific factors that influenced the treatment choice.
           ·· Asking the patient about treatment-related preferences.
           ·· An explanation to the patient of the following: the differential diagnosis,
              risks of untreated illness, treatment options, and benefits and risks of
              treatment.                                     
           ·· Collaboration between the clinician and the patient about decisions
              pertinent to treatment.                        
           ·· Documentation of the rationale for clinical tests.
         The APMHN formulates the basic structure of the interview by connecting each
         successive topic to the one that precedes it. For example, the earlier case sce-
         nario presented the topic of “breaking up with her boyfriend,” which caused the
         client’s emotional turmoil. Discussion of these issues led to the next phase of
         assessing the client’s mental health status. The APMHN’s ability to structure the
         interview naturally, transitioning organically from one phase to the next, requires

=== Page 26 (1 cols) ===
Mental Health Evaluation of Adults 15
       a skillful approach, and the clinician’s successful structuring lies in developing,
       understanding, and applying the contents of each heading of the mental health
       evaluation guidelines.                                
                                                             
       Section 3: Case Exemplar                              
                                                             
       Below is a sample psychiatric evaluation written by the APMHN at the conclu-
       sion of the case scenario presented earlier. The format used is slightly modified
       from the above APA (2016) guidelines to be practical for clinical use.
        1. Identification, Chief Complaint, and Reason for Referral
            Jane Larson (JL) is a 31-year-old Caucasian female who presents with the
          chief complaint, “My family thinks I am depressed and need to see someone.”
        2. History of Present Illness                        
            JL reports that following the break-up 6 months ago with her boyfriend
          who was unfaithful to her, she has been isolating herself, crying a lot, not
          sleeping or eating, has poor concentration at work, is constantly preoccupied
          with the incident, and feels worthless and hopeless. JL also reports that she
          has been suffering from decreased motivation and low energy. She reports
          having thoughts recently of “just not being here,” but denies having suicidal
          intent/plans. JL denies hallucinations, delusions, or homicidal ideations. JL
          wants to feel better so that she can move forward living her life.
        3. Past Psychiatric History                          
            JL denies a history of psychotic symptoms and denies ever attempting to
          kill herself or having a history of psychiatric inpatient admission. Assessment
          revealed no history of manic episodes. JL reports intermittent treatment of
          depressive symptoms since her early 20s, typically provided by her primary
          care provider. She has been treated with either monotherapy antidepressants
          or a combination of antidepressants and benzodiazepine. Her treatment history
          also includes trials of sertraline, citalopram, venlafaxine XR, and bupropion.
          JL reports modest improvement of depressive symptoms with monotherapy
          of these antidepressants, which were, at times, supplemented with diazepam
          or lorazepam. JL has also received trazodone treatment for insomnia, which
          she reports as effective in the past. JL last received treatment for her mood
          symptoms 3 years ago. She states that she was not compliant with treatment
          for longer than 5 or 6 months because it did not seem to help her depression.
        4. Substance Use History                             
            JL reports a history of using roughly one-half gram of marijuana two or
          three times weekly, “to take the edge off and help me to sleep.” She does not
          drink alcohol or use other drugs.                  
        5. Social and Developmental History                  
            JL is currently living alone, financially self-sufficient, and has a few close
          friends. She is the oldest of three siblings (two younger brothers) with whom
          she is not close. Father passed away when she was 5 years old and mother, who
          is 60 years old, has been supportive of her. JL denied any history of trauma.

=== Page 27 (1 cols) ===
16 Mental Health Evaluation of Adults               
          6. Family Psychiatric History                      
             JL’s family mental illness history is positive for depression (mother and
           maternal grandmother), and anxiety disorder (youngest brother). No one in
           JL’s family has been admitted for inpatient psychiatric care. There is no fam-
           ily history of substance use disorder reported.   
          7. Medical History and Review of Systems           
             JL’s medical history is significant for hypothyroidism, seasonal allergies
           (pollen), and irritable bowel syndrome. Current medications include levothy-
           roxine 0.75 mg daily. JL’s surgical history includes a tonsillectomy at age
           2, secondary to recurrent tonsillitis and ear infections. Review of systems
           showed no significant observable overall physical abnormalities. She is aller-
           gic to Demerol (nausea and vomiting).             
          8. Mental Status Examination                       
           a. General appearance: Appeared to be the stated age, neatly groomed,
              wearing T-shirt and jeans, good hygiene. Soft spoken and cooperative
              during the interview.                          
           b. Mood: Sad and depressed.                       
           c. Affect: Tearful and mood congruent.            
           d. Thought content and process: No significant thought disturbances noted.
              Denied current suicidal ideas, plans, and intent, including active or pas-
              sive thoughts of suicide or death. Denied current aggressive or violent
              thoughts.                                      
           e. Perceptual disturbances: Denied auditory, visual, or tactile hallucinations.
            f. Sensorium, cognitive, and intellectual functioning: Alert and oriented ×
              3. Attention span and concentration are intact, insight into the illness
              present.                                       
          9. Diagnostic Impression and Treatment Plan        
           a. DSM-5 diagnosis: Major depressive disorder (MDD), moderate. May
              use a patient health questionnaire (PHQ)-9 instrument to measure quan-
              titative symptoms of depression.               
           b. Treatment plan:                                
              ·· Assess current suicide risk, including ideation, intent, and plans.
              ·· Assess an estimated risk of aggressive behavior toward her
                ex-boyfriend.                                
              ·· Discuss treatment selections, including medication and psychother-
                apy, and ask the client about treatment-related preferences.
              ·· Explain to the client the following: differential diagnosis, risks of
                untreated illness, treatment options, and benefits and risks of treatment.
         Section 4: Psychiatric Terminology                  
         Review of Basic Psychiatric Terminology             
         Psychiatric terminology is commonly used to describe signs and symptoms of
         mental disorders. Signs of these disorders are usually objective observations of

=== Page 28 (1 cols) ===
Mental Health Evaluation of Adults 17
       the client by the clinician, while symptoms are clients’ subjective experiences.
       In the mental health field, signs and symptoms often overlap; therefore, mental
       disorders are described as syndromes—a constellation of signs and symptoms that
       together make up a recognizable condition (Sadock & Sadock, 2010). In the case
       scenario presented earlier, the client complains of symptoms of sadness, sleep dis-
       turbance, poor appetite, loneliness, and feeling down (depressed). The clinician
       observes signs of depressive disorder manifested by tearfulness, insomnia, weight
       loss, social isolation, and depressed mood. The clinician also observes and evalu-
       ates the client’s mood, affect, speech, thought process and content, and sensory
       disturbance, and then documents the evaluation using appropriate terminology.
         It is essential for APMHNs to be familiar with the basic psychiatric termi-
       nology commonly used to address these signs and symptoms so that they can
       fully implement and comprehend all psychiatric documentation utilized in clinical
       practice, including writing clients’ psychiatric evaluations and communicating
       with other clinicians. The glossary of terms provided in Table 1.2 does not cover
       the full spectrum of psychiatric terminology, but is limited to commonly used
       basic terminology for APMHN students and clinicians to use as a quick reference.
                                                             
       Table 1.2 Glossary of Terms                           
       Term     Definition                                   
       Aculalia Nonsense speech associated with marked impairment of comprehension.
                  Occurs in mania, schizophrenia, and neurological deficit (Sadock &
                  Sadock, 2010).                             
       Aerophagia Excessive swallowing of air, usually an unconscious process associated
                  with anxiety, resulting in abdominal distention or belching.
       Affect   The subjective and immediate experience of emotion attached to ideas or
                  mental representations of objects. Appropriate affect is emotional tone in
                  harmony with the accompanying idea, thought, or speech.
                Affect that is not appropriate has outward manifestations that may be
                  classified as:                             
                ·· Blunted affect: Severe reduction in the intensity of externalized feeling
                  tone; one of the fundamental symptoms of schizophrenia.
                ·· Constricted affect: Reduction in intensity of feeling tone that is less
                  severe than blunted affect.                
                ·· Flat affect: Absence or near absence of any signs of affective expression.
                ·· Inappropriate affect: Emotional tone out of harmony with the idea,
                  thought, or speech accompanying it. Seen in schizophrenia.
                ·· Labile affect: Affective expression characterized by rapid and abrupt
                  changes, unrelated to external stimuli.    
                ·· Restricted affect: Reduction in intensity of feeling tone that is less severe
                  than in blunted affect but clearly reduced. May be used interchangeably
                  with constricted affect.                   
       Agnosia  Inability of a person to recognize faces, voices, places, or objects.
       Agoraphobia Morbid fear of open places or of leaving the familiar setting of the home.
                  May be present with or without panic attacks.
                                              (Continued)

=== Page 29 (1 cols) ===
18 Mental Health Evaluation of Adults               
         Table 1.2 (Continued)                               
                                                             
         Term     Definition                                 
         Akathisia Subjective feeling of motor restlessness manifested by a compelling need
                   to be in constant movement; may be seen as an extrapyramidal adverse
                   effect of antipsychotic medication. May be mistaken for psychotic
                   agitation.                                
         Alogia   Inability to speak due to mental deficiency or a manifestation of dementia.
         Anergia  A chronic state of lethargy and low energy, commonly characterized by the
                   inability to complete normal tasks. Often associated with depression.
         Anhedonia Loss of interest in, and withdrawal from, all regular and pleasurable
                   activities. Inability to feel pleasure. A common symptom of depression
                   as well as of other mental health disorders.
         Anxiety  Feeling of apprehension caused by anticipation of danger, which may be
                   internal or external.                     
                  ·· Free-floating anxiety: Severe, pervasive, generalized anxiety that is not
                   attached to any particular idea, object, or event. Observed particularly
                   in anxiety disorders, although it may be seen in some cases of
                   schizophrenia.                            
         Apraxia  Inability to perform a voluntary purposeful motor activity despite being
                   able to demonstrate normal muscle function. Apraxia is not related to a
                   lack of understanding or to any kind of physical paralysis. Rather, it is
                   caused by a problem in the cortex of the brain.
         Blackout Amnesia experienced by alcoholics about behavior during drinking bouts.
         (Thought) Abrupt interruption in train of thinking before a thought or idea is finished;
          Blocking after a brief pause, the person indicates no recall of what was being
                   said or what was going to be said (also known as thought deprivation or
                   increased thought latency). Common in schizophrenia and severe anxiety.
         Catalepsy Condition in which a person maintains the body position into which they
                   are placed; observed in severe cases of catatonic schizophrenia. Also
                   called waxy flexibility.                  
         Circum-  Disturbance in associative thought and speech processes in which a person
          stantiality digresses into unnecessary details and inappropriate thoughts before
                   communicating the central idea. Observed in schizophrenia, obsessional
                   disturbances, and certain cases of dementia. See also tangentiality.
         Clang    Association or speech directed by the sound of a word rather than by its
          association meaning; words have no logical connection; punning and rhyming may
                   dominate the verbal behavior. Seen most frequently in schizophrenia or
                   mania.                                    
         Concrete Thinking characterized by actual things, events, and immediate experience,
          thinking rather than by abstractions.              
         Confabulation Unconscious filling of gaps in memory by imagining experiences or events
                   that have no basis in fact; commonly seen in amnestic syndromes.
                   Should be differentiated from lying.      
         Coprolalia Involuntary use of vulgar or obscene language. Observed in some cases of
                   schizophrenia and in Tourette’s syndrome. 
         Decompensation Deterioration of psychic functioning caused by a breakdown of defense
                   mechanisms. Seen in psychotic states.     
         Delirium Acute reversible mental disorder characterized by confusion and some
                   impairment of consciousness; generally associated with emotional
                   lability, hallucinations or illusions, and inappropriate, impulsive,
                   irrational, or violent behaviors.         
                                                (Continued)

=== Page 30 (1 cols) ===
Mental Health Evaluation of Adults 19
       Table 1.2 (Continued)                                 
                                                             
       Term     Definition                                   
       Delusion False belief, based on incorrect inference about external reality, that
                  is firmly held despite objective and obvious contradictory proof or
                  evidence, and despite the fact that other members of the culture do not
                  share the belief. Types of delusions are:  
                ·· Delusion of grandeur: Exaggerated conception of one’s importance,
                  power, or identity.                        
                ·· Delusion of persecution: False belief of being harassed or persecuted;
                  often found in litigious patients who have a pathological tendency to take
                  legal action because of imagined mistreatment. Most common delusion.
                ·· Delusion of reference: False belief that the behavior of others refers
                  to oneself or that events, objects, or other people have a particular and
                  unusual significance to the person, usually of a negative nature; derived
                  from idea of reference, in which persons falsely feel that others are
                  talking about them (e.g., belief that people on television or radio are
                  talking to or about the person).           
                ·· Folie a deux: Mental illness shared by two persons, usually involving a
                  common delusional system; if it involves three persons, it is referred to
                  as folie a trois, and so on.               
                ·· Nihilistic delusion: Depressive delusion that the world and everything
                  related to it has ceased to exist.         
                ·· Somatic delusion: Delusion pertaining to the functioning of one’s body.
                ·· Systemized delusion: Group of elaborate delusions related to a single
                  event or theme.                            
       Dysphoria Feeling of unpleasantness or discomfort; a mood of general dissatisfaction
                  and restlessness. Occurs in depression and anxiety.
       Dystonia Extrapyramidal motor disturbance consisting of slow, sustained
                  contractions of the axial or appendicular musculature; one movement
                  often predominates, leading to relatively sustained postural deviations;
                  acute dystonic reactions (facial grimacing and torticollis) are
                  occasionally seen with the initiation of antipsychotic drug treatment.
       Echolalia Psychopathological repeating of one person’s words or phrases by another
                  person; tends to be repetitive and persistent. Seen in certain kinds of
                  schizophrenia, particularly the catatonic types.
       Egocentric Self-centered; selfishly preoccupied with one’s own needs; little or no
                  interest in others.                        
       Euphoria Exaggerated feeling of well-being that is inappropriate to real events. Can
                  occur with drugs, such as opiates, amphetamines, and alcohol.
       Formal thought Disturbance in the form, rather than in the content, of thought; thinking
         disorder characterized by loosened associations, neologisms, and illogical
                  constructs; thought process is disordered, and the person is defined as
                  psychotic. Characteristics of schizophrenia. Types of formal thought
                  disorders are:                             
                ·· Illogical constructs.                     
                ·· Loosened association.                     
                ·· Neologism.                                
       Fugue    Dissociative disorder characterized by a period of almost complete amnesia,
                  during which a person actually flees from an immediate life situation
                  and begins a different life pattern; apart from the amnesia, mental
                  faculties and skills are usually unimpaired.
                                              (Continued)

=== Page 31 (1 cols) ===
20 Mental Health Evaluation of Adults               
         Table 1.2 (Continued)                               
                                                             
         Term     Definition                                 
         Hallucination False sensory perception occurring in the absence of any relevant external
                   stimulation of the sensory modality involved. Types of hallucinations are
                  ·· Auditory hallucination: False perception of sounds, usually voices,
                   but also of other noises, such as music. Most common hallucination in
                   psychiatric disorders.                    
                  ·· Command hallucination: False perception of orders that a person may
                   feel obliged to obey or unable to resist. 
                  ·· Gustatory hallucination: Hallucination primarily involving taste.
                  ·· Olfactory hallucination: Hallucination primarily involving smell or odor;
                   most common in medical disorders, especially in the temporal lobe.
                  ·· Somatic hallucination: Hallucination involving the perception of a
                   physical experience localized within the body.
                  ·· Tactile hallucination (formication): Involving the sensation that tiny
                   insects are crawling over the skin. Seen in cocaine addiction and
                   delirium tremens.                         
                  ·· Visual hallucination: Hallucination primarily involving the sense of sight.
         Idea of reference Misinterpretation of incidents and events in the outside world as having
                   direct personal reference to oneself; occasionally observed in normal
                   persons, but frequently seen in paranoid patients. If present with
                   sufficient frequency or intensity, or if organized and systematized, they
                   constitute delusions of reference.        
         Loosening of Unrelated and unconnected ideas, in which the person shifts from one
          association subject to another. Characteristic schizophrenic thinking or speech
                   disturbance involving a disorder in the logical progression of thoughts,
                   manifested as a failure to adequately communicate verbally.
         Mood     Pervasive and sustained feeling tone that is experienced internally and that,
                   in the extreme, can markedly influence virtually all aspects of a person’s
                   behavior and perception of the world. Distinguished from affect, which
                   is the external expression of the internal feeling tone. Types of mood, in
                   order of severity:                        
                  ·· Euthymia: Normal range of mood, implying absence of depression or of
                   elevated mood.                            
                  ·· Elevated mood: Air of confidence and enjoyment; a mood more cheerful
                   than normal, but not necessarily pathological.
                  ·· Exaltation: Feeling of intense elation and grandeur.
                  ·· Expansive mood: Expression of feelings without restraint, frequently
                   with an overestimation of their significance or importance. Seen in
                   mania and grandiose delusional disorder.  
                  ·· Irritable mood: State in which one is easily annoyed and impatient, and
                   provoked to anger.                        
                  ·· Labile mood: Oscillations in mood between euphoria and depression or
                   anxiety.                                  
         Neologism New word or phrase whose derivation cannot be understood.
         Paranoid Thinking dominated by suspicious, persecutory, or grandiose content of less
          ideation than delusional proportions.              
         Preoccupation Centering of thought content on a particular idea, associated with a strong
          of thought affective tone, such as a paranoid trend or a suicidal or homicidal
                   preoccupation.                            
                                                (Continued)

=== Page 32 (1 cols) ===
Mental Health Evaluation of Adults 21
       Table 1.2 (Continued)                                 
                                                             
       Term     Definition                                   
       Psychomotor Physical and mental overactivity that is usually nonproductive and is
         agitation associated with a feeling of inner turmoil, as seen in agitated depression.
       Rumination Constant preoccupation with thinking about a single idea or theme, as in
                  obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).       
       Speech patterns ·· Poverty of speech: Restriction in the amount of speech used; replies
                  may be monosyllabic, little or no unprompted additional information
                  provided. Occurs in major depression, schizophrenia, and organic
                  mental disorders. Also called laconic speech.
                ·· Pressured speech: Increase in the amount of spontaneous speech; rapid,
                  loud, accelerated speech. Occurs in mania, schizophrenia, and cognitive
                  disorders.                                 
                ·· Tangentiality: Oblique, digressive, or even irrelevant manner of speech
                  in which the central idea is not communicated.
                ·· Word salad: Incoherent, essentially incomprehensible, mixture of words
                  and phrases commonly seen in far-advanced cases of schizophrenia.
       Suggestibility State of uncritical compliance with influence, or of uncritical acceptance
                  of an idea, belief, or attitude; commonly observed among persons with
                  hysterical traits.                         
       Suicidal ideation Thoughts of taking one’s own life.  
       Suicide attempt A nonfatal, self-directed, potentially injurious behavior with any intent to
                  die as a result of the behavior. A suicide attempt may or may not result
                  in injury and may be aborted by the individual or interrupted by another
                  individual.                                
       Suicide intent Subjective expectation and desire for a self-injurious act to end in death.
       Thought  Any disturbance of thinking that affects language, communication, or
         disorder thought content; the hallmark feature of schizophrenia. Manifestations
                  range from simple blocking and mild circumstantiality to profound
                  loosening of association, incoherence, or delusions; characterized by a
                  failure to follow semantic and syntactic rules that is inconsistent with
                  the person’s education, intelligence, or cultural background.
       Source: Adapted from Sadock and Sadock (2010).        
       References                                            
       American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2016). The American Psychiatric Association
         practice guidelines for the psychiatric evaluation of adults (3rd ed.). American
         Psychiatric Association. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.pn.2015.8a5
       Belleza, M. (2020). Therapeutic communication techniques in nursing: Nurses-labs.
         https://nurseslabs.com/therapeutic-communication-techniques-in-nursing/
       Doran, C. M. (2013). Prescribing mental health medication: The practitioner’s guide (2nd
         ed.). Routledge. ISBN 9780415536097                 
       Johnson, K., & Vanderhoef, D. (2016). Psychiatric mental health nurse practitioner:
         Nursing certification review manual (4th ed.). American Nurses Association. ISBN
         978-193 521                                         
       Sadock, B., & Sadock, V. (2010). Kaplan & Sadock’s pocket handbook of clinical
         psychiatry (5th ed.). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
       Shea, S. C. (1998). Psychiatric interviewing: The art of understanding (2nd ed.). W.B.
         Saunders. ISBN-13: 978-0721670119                   
       Walker, S. (2014). Engagement and therapeutic communication in mental health nursing.
         SAGE Publications. ISBN: 978 1 4462 7480 4

=== Page 33 (1 cols) ===
2   Case-Based   Differential Diagnostic            
             Mental  Health  Evaluation  for Adults          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         Utilizing a common language with which to classify different psychiatric diag-
         noses enables mental health clinicians to facilitate a more consistent treatment
         and referral across practitioners. The two most recognized compilations of
         psychiatric classifications are the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
         Disorders (DSM-5), published by the American Psychiatric Association (APA),
         and the International Classification of Diseases (ICD), developed by the World
         Health Organization (WHO). The DSM-5 (APA, 2013) is used in this book, as
         it is designed to facilitate reliable diagnoses by classifying mental disorders with
         associated criteria, and is therefore a standard reference for clinical practice in the
         mental health field.                                
          The DSM-5 discusses 22 categories of psychiatric disorders; this chapter
         presents the ten most likely to be encountered by advanced psychiatric mental
         health nurses (APMHNs) in their clinical practice. For each, a case-based differ-
         ential diagnostic mental health evaluation for adults is provided to demonstrate
         the common skills needed to achieve a successful evaluation and treatment plan.
         However, as this book is focused on assessment and diagnosis, each treatment
         plan is only presented briefly, tailored to the uniqueness of each disorder.
          Furthermore, the language used in these case exemplars is not meant to be pre-
         scriptive. While there are essential aspects of an evaluation that must be covered
         to reach an accurate diagnosis, and while the APMHN should interact with clients
         in ways that allow them to feel comfortable enough to disclose essential informa-
         tion, each APMHN should adjust the language and style in these examples to fit
         their own personality, as that too is part of successful clinical practice.
         Section 1: Schizophrenia                            
         Schizophrenia is a psychotic disorder defined by the DSM-5 as the breakdown
         of an individual’s perceptual, cognitive, and functional status to the point that
         the individual experiences reality in ways that are very different from how other
         people within the same culture experience it. It is the most common and best-
         known psychotic illness, but is not synonymous with psychosis. It affects 1%
         of the US population, with over 300,000 acute schizophrenic episodes in the
         United States annually (Stahl, 2013). Approximately 20% of clients diagnosed
         DOI: 10.4324/9781003137597-3

=== Page 34 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 23
       with schizophrenia attempt suicide, and 5–6% of these eventually succeed (APA,
       2013), contributing to a mortality rate that is eight times greater than that of the
       general US population. Life expectancy of a client with schizophrenia may be
       20–30 years shorter than that of the general population due to multiple factors,
       such as poor physical health caused by smoking, unhealthy diet, obesity, or dia-
       betes, some of which can be exacerbated by adverse reactions to antipsychotic
       medications (Stahl, 2013).                            
         The syndrome of schizophrenia consists of a mixture of three major symptom
       categories—positive, negative, and cognitive—as presented in Table 2.1.
         A diagnosis of schizophrenia involves a constellation of signs and symptoms
       associated with a client’s occupational and social impairments.
                                                             
       Diagnostic Criteria                                   
       DSM-5 Schizophrenia Diagnostic Criteria Modified      
        A. Signs and Symptoms: Presents two (or more) of the following signs and
          symptoms, at least one of which must be 1, 2, or 3 below. Only one Criterion
          A symptom is required if delusions are bizarre or if hallucinations consist of
          either a voice keeping up or making a running commentary on the person’s
          behavior or thoughts, or of two or more voices conversing with each other:
          1. Delusions.                                      
          2. Hallucinations.                                 
          3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
          4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.     
          5. Negative symptoms (e.g., affective flattening, alogia, or anhedonia).
        B. Duration: Each sign or symptom presents for a significant portion of time
          during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated). Unless successfully
          treated, continuous signs of the illness persist for at least 6 months.
       Table 2.1 Symptom Categories of Schizophrenia         
                                                             
       Positive Symptoms Negative Symptoms Cognitive Symptoms
       Delusions      Blunted affect Problems representing and
                                       maintaining goals     
       Hallucinations Emotional and apathetic Problems focusing and
                        social withdrawal sustaining attention
       Distortions or exaggerations Passivity and poor rapport Problems modulating
         in language and               behavior based upon   
         communication                 social cues           
       Disorganized speech Difficulty in abstract thinking Problems prioritizing
       Disorganized behavior Lack of spontaneity Problems with serial learning
       Catatonic behavior Alogia (restrictions in Difficulty with
                        fluency and productivity problem-solving
                        of thought and speech)               
       Agitation      Anhedonia (lack of pleasure) Impaired verbal fluency
       Source: Adapted from Stahl (2013).

=== Page 35 (1 cols) ===
24 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         C. Impairment in Function: For a significant portion of the time following
           the onset of the illness, one or more major areas, such as work, interpersonal
           relations, or self-care, are markedly below the level achieved prior to the
           onset.                                            
         D. Differential Diagnosis: Rule out schizoaffective disorder and depressive or
           bipolar disorder with psychotic features by determining that:
           1. No major depressive or manic episodes have occurred concurrently with
              the active phase symptoms.                     
           2. If they have, they have been present for a minority of the total duration
              of the active and residual periods of the illness.
          E. Diagnostic Recording: After 1-year duration of the disorder, the following
           specifiers can be used, as appropriate:           
           1. First episode, currently in acute episode.     
           2. First episode, currently in partial remission. 
           3. First episode, currently in full remission.    
           4. Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode. 
           5. Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission.
           6. Multiple episodes, currently in full remission.
           7. Continuous.                                    
           8. Unspecified.                                   
         In addition to understanding the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia, it is
         essential that APMHNs have a working knowledge of its neurobiological basis,
         especially the role of brain circuits and related symptom dimensions, to accurately
         and safely prescribe psychotropic medications. Box 2.1 summarizes the neurobio-
         logical theories of schizophrenia from the currently available literature.
                                                             
          Box 2.1 Neurobiological Theories of Schizophrenia  
                                                             
          While our understanding of the neurological basis of schizophrenia has
          advanced, leading to the development of more efficacious psychotropic
          medications, it is important to note that there are still many limitations to
          what is currently known, as every brain area has several functions, and every
          function is distributed across more than one brain area. However, ascribing
          specific symptom dimensions to unique brain areas not only assists research
          studies, but also has clinical value, as each client has unique psychiatric
          symptoms as well as specific responses to medications designed to target
          the brain’s unique circuits, neurotransmitters, receptors, and enzymes.
          A. Hypothesis of Neuroanatomy of Dopamine          
          Neuronal Pathways in the Brain                     
          The various symptoms of schizophrenia are hypothesized to be local-
          ized in the malfunctioning of unique brain regions. The neuroanatomy of

=== Page 36 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 25
                                                             
         dopamine (DA) neuronal pathways in the brain explains the symptoms of
         schizophrenia, as well as the therapeutic and adverse effects of antipsy-
         chotic medications. There are five dopamine pathways in the brain, two
         of which are predominantly related to positive and negative symptoms of
         schizophrenia: (1) the mesolimbic pathway’s hyper-dopaminergic state,
         which results in positive symptoms; and (2) the mesocortical pathway’s
         hypodopaminergic state, which results in negative, cognitive, and affective
         symptoms.                                           
           The mesolimbic dopamine pathway is involved in the regulation of
         emotional behaviors and is believed to be the predominant pathway that
         regulates positive symptoms of psychosis. Excessive dopamine activities in
         this pathway are believed to account for delusions and hallucinations. This
         pathway is also involved in pleasure, reward, and reinforcing behavior, and
         many drugs that are abused interact here.           
           The mesocortical dopamine pathway projects from the ventral tegmen-
         tal area (VTA), followed by two separate projections in the prefrontal cortex
         (PFC): the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and the ventral medial
         prefrontal cortex (VMPFC). Projections specific to the DLPFC are associ-
         ated with hypoactivity of dopamine neurons and are believed to be involved
         in the negative and cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia. Projections spe-
         cific to the VMPFC are also associated with hypoactivity of dopamine
         neurons, but are believed to mediate negative and affective symptoms of
         schizophrenia.                                      
           Another key dopamine pathway in the brain is the nigrostriatal dopa-
         mine pathway, which projects from the brainstem substantia nigra through
         axons terminating in the basal ganglia or striatum. It is part of the extra-
         pyramidal nervous system and plays a key role in regulating movements.
         It is believed that clients with schizophrenia do not have an abnormality
         of dopamine in this pathway. However, such a client taking antipsychotic
         medication which blocks dopamine may develop dopamine deficiency in
         this pathway, which can lead to extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS). In fact,
         chronic blockade of dopamine receptors in this pathway may result in a
         neuroleptic-induced tardive dyskinesia.             
           Another well-known dopamine pathway is the tuberoinfundibular
         dopamine pathway, in which dopamine neurons project from the hypo-
         thalamus to the anterior pituitary, where prolactin secretion into the blood
         circulation is regulated. Dopamine activity in this pathway is relatively pre-
         served in clients with schizophrenia. However, as dopamine inhibits prolac-
         tin secretion, prolactin levels can rise, which leads to hyperprolactinemia in
         a client with schizophrenia who is treated with dopamine-blocking antipsy-
         chotic medication (Stahl, 2013).                    
           There are currently two types of Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-
         approved pharmacologic options for the treatment of schizophrenia: (1)

=== Page 37 (1 cols) ===
26 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                                                             
          dopamine blockers at dopamine receptors, to target the positive symptoms
          that typical antipsychotic medications (first-generation antipsychotics)
          target; and (2) antagonism at the serotonin (S-hydroxytryptamine, 5HT)
          receptor site to disinhibit dopamine release from the presynaptic dopamine
          neuron, which targets the negative, cognitive, and affective symptoms that
          atypical antipsychotic medications (second-generation antipsychotics)
          target. In other words, atypical antipsychotic medications are designed to
          block postsynaptic dopamine receptors in the mesolimbic pathway where
          dopamine antagonism is predominant, as well as to simultaneously promote
          the release of dopamine from the presynaptic dopamine neuron in the meso-
          cortical pathway, where less dopamine activity will take place (Citrome,
          2011).                                             
            The dopamine neurotransmitter in the brain dopamine pathways related
          to symptoms of schizophrenia is summarized in Table 2.2.
          Table 2.2 Dopamine Neurotransmitter Pathways and Level of Dopamine Resulting
               Symptoms of Schizophrenia                     
                                                             
          Brain Neurotransmitter Pathways Level of Symptoms of
                             Dopamine Schizophrenia          
                             Neurotransmitter                
          Mesolimbic pathway; from ventral Dopamine— Positive symptoms
           tegmental area to nucleus hyper-dopa-             
           accumbens          minergic state                 
          Mesocortical pathways; from Dopamine— Cognitive symptoms
           ventral tegmental area to cortex hypo-dopamin- (DLPFC)
           (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ergic state Negative symptoms
           [DLPFC] and the ventral medial (DLPFC and VMPFC)  
           prefrontal cortex [VMPFC]) Affective symptoms     
                                        (VMPFC)              
          Nigrostriatal pathway; from the sub- Dopamine—suf- Dopamine blockade can
           stantia nigra to the striatum ficient lead to develop extrapy-
                                        ramidal symptoms     
                                        (EPS)*               
          Tuberoinfundibular pathway; from Dopamine—suf- Dopamine blockade can
           the hypothalamus to the pituitary ficient lead to elevations in
           gland                        prolactin release*   
          Dopamine pathway arises from mul- Its function is not cur-
           tiple sites; from periaqueductal rently well known
           gray, ventral mesencephalon,                      
           hypothalamic nuclei, and lateral                  
           parabrachial nucleus to the                       
           thalamus                                          
          Source: Stahl (2013).                              
          Note: *Commonly known adverse reactions of antipsychotic medications are due to dopamine
          blockade.

=== Page 38 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 27
                                                             
         B. Hypothesis of Glutamate Neurotransmitter         
         Abnormality in the Brain                            
         In addition to this well-known theory of dopamine neurotransmitter abnor-
         malities in clients with schizophrenia, researchers have also explored the
         potential role of another brain neurotransmitter, glutamate, in the pathophysi-
         ology of schizophrenia, as a precursor to developing additional medications to
         treat it. Glutamate is known as the major excitatory neurotransmitter in
         the brain and is believed to interact with virtually all neurons in the brain that
         are involved in fast-synaptic transmission, in neuroplasticity, and in cogni-
         tive functions, including memory. In addition, glutamate neurons can be con-
         nected to dopamine neurons. Therefore, it is hypothesized that schizophrenia
         can be caused by hypofunctional glutamate activity at N-methyl-D-aspartate
         (NMDA) receptors due to abnormalities in the formation of glutamatergic
         NMDA synapses during neurodevelopment. This theory postulates that
         under normal circumstances, tonic inhibition occurs in the NMDA receptor
         regulation of the mesolimbic dopamine pathway (Stahl, 2013).
           The glutamate neuron connects to a gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA)
         interneuron, which then connects to a dopamine neuron, resulting in the
         inhibition of dopamine release. In the presence of NMDA receptor hypo-
         function in the cortical brainstem projections of patients with schizophrenia,
         hyperactivity of the mesolimbic dopamine pathway would take place. In
         other words, in the normal state, glutamate acts as an indirect brake on dopa-
         mine release. However, hypoactive glutamate neurons result is insufficient
                                                             
                Cortical Glutamate Regulates Dopamine Neurons
                        in 2 possible Ways                   
                                                             
             Glutamate Direct                                
               action as an                                  
               accelerator                                   
                                                             
                                                             
                                       GABA                  
                                       Glutamate             
                                      Indirect action        
                                       as a brake            
                Dopamine                                     
                            Cortex                           
         Figure 2.1 Cortical glutamate regulated dopamine neurons in two possible ways.
               Note: This figure shows the mechanism of how cortical glutamate
               regulates dopamine neurons in two possible ways; directly, by means
               of glutamatergic fibers projecting to the brainstem neurons (accelerator)
               and indirectly by fibers projecting to the glutamatergic/GABAergic
               pathway from cortex to brainstem (brake).

=== Page 39 (1 cols) ===
28 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                                                             
          activity at the GABA interneuron, releasing the brake, which leads to exces-
          sive dopamine being released into the mesolimbic system, which produces
          the positive symptoms of schizophrenia. Cognitive, negative, and mood
          symptoms are explained by the possibility that glutamate neurons project
          directly on dopamine neurons, rather than through a GABA interneuron.
          Under normal conditions, NMDA receptor regulation of mesocortical dopa-
          mine pathways is that of tonic excitation, resulting in the release of suffi-
          cient dopamine in the DLPFC and VMPFC to allow successful regulation
          of cognition and mood, as well as avoiding so-called negative symptoms.
          With NMDA receptor hypofunction, the direct result would be hypoactivity
          of mesocortical dopamine pathways, with insufficient dopamine release in
          the DLPFC and VMPFC, resulting in the cognitive, negative, and affective
          symptoms of schizophrenia (Citrome, 2011) (Figure 2.1).
                                                             
         Interviewing Techniques to Assess Psychotic States of Schizophrenia
         This section discusses practical points to help the APMHN assess a schizophrenic
         client’s psychotic states and build a rapport with the client through understand-
         ing those states from the client’s point of view. For example, assessing clients
         who experience auditory hallucinations can be challenging. APMHNs typically
         ask patients with known or suspected auditory hallucinations the following two
         questions: (a) “Do you hear voices?” and (b) “Are your voices commanding you
         to harm yourself or anyone else?” Although asking these questions is critically
         important to maintain the safety of these clients and others, additional questions
         should also be asked to obtain a comprehensive assessment of the clients’ experi-
         ences with hallucinations (Trygstad et al., 2015).  
          The following are guidelines to assist the APMHN to effectively assess schizo-
         phrenic clients who exhibit one or both of the two most common major positive
         symptoms of schizophrenia: hallucinations (perceptual disturbances) and delu-
         sions (thought disturbances).                       
         A. Assessment of Hallucinations                     
                                                             
                                                             
         Shea (1998a) suggests that the following questions can convey to clients that the
         clinician is genuine in wanting to know about their experiences, while helping the
         clinician to learn about the contents of clients’ hallucinations.
          1. When you are feeling very distressed, do your thoughts ever get so intense
           that they sound almost like a voice?              
             This question allows the clinician to tie the phenomena directly to the
           client’s emotional turmoil in a fairly nonconfrontational fashion. Phrasing
           the client’s thoughts as sounding like a voice can offer a back door to

=== Page 40 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 29
          reluctant clients who fear being viewed as “crazy.” If the client answers
          this question affirmatively, consider the following questions to gather fur-
          ther information.                                  
        2. Tell me what the voices sound like to you.        
        3. What do they say to you?                          
        4. Do they sometimes taunt you or say mean things about you?
        5. Are they male or female voices?                   
        6. Do they seem to be inside your head or do they come from outside your head?
       In a typical first interview, the APMHN may not have time to ask any or all of
       these questions, but as time permits in subsequent sessions, the clinician can pick
       and choose, constantly exploring to better understand the client’s world and to
       assess their mental status while building a rapport with the client.
         Additional questions can be asked to address potential risk factors and to find
       out if there are also nonauditory hallucinations.     
                                                             
        1. Do they ever tell you to harm yourself or others? (Important: risk, command
          hallucinations)                                    
        2. Have you had any strange tastes, smells, or visions lately? (Hallucinations in
          other modalities)                                  
        B. Assessment of Thoughts and Delusions              
                                                             
          1. Have you ever felt/do you feel like your thoughts are being interfered
            with … (pause) … like thoughts are being put into your head? (Thought
            insertion)                                       
          2. Have you ever felt/do you feel like thoughts are being taken out of your
            head? (Thought withdrawal)                       
          3. Have you ever felt/do you feel like your thoughts are being broadcast
            to other people so that they know what you are thinking? (Thought
            broadcasting)                                    
          4. Have you ever felt under the control of someone other than yourself?
          5. Have you ever felt like your actions, feelings, or urges are being con-
            trolled by some external force? (Passivity phenomenon)
          6. Have you ever felt any strange sensations in your body? (Somatic
            passivity)                                       
          7. Have you ever felt that people on the radio or TV were talking about you
            in their reports or giving you special messages? (Ideas or delusions of
            reference)                                       
          8. Do you ever receive any messages from books, radio, or TV that are
            specifically meant for you? (Paranoid bizarre delusions)
          9. Do you ever feel like you are being spied upon or that someone is follow-
            ing you or conspiring against you? (Persecutory delusions)
         10. Do you ever feel like you are being watched by cameras or special
            devices? (Persecutory delusions)

=== Page 41 (1 cols) ===
30 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                                                             
         Table 2.3 “Do” and “Do Not” Question Examples in Dealing with a Client with Delusions
         Do Not Dismiss their delusion as inconsequential    
         Do    Calmly ask objective questions about their delusion
         Do Not Verbally assault them or call them “crazy”   
         Do    Seek medical attention for the individual should the situation warrant it
         Do Not Play along with their delusion               
         Do    Calmly ask in a nonjudgmental manner          
         If the client answers “yes” to any of the above questions, the clinician can follow
         up with the question. How did it start? (to establish delusional perception).
                                                             
         (Retrieved from Psych Scene Hub (n.d.) Schizophrenia—Diagnostic Interview)
         What is the best way to respond to someone experiencing delusions? Challenging
         these clients almost always causes them to put up their defenses and retreat further
         into their beliefs; however, feeding into their delusions will only give them more
         reason to think their beliefs are justified. Therefore, do not ignore the delusion or
         write it off as just a fleeting belief, but instead calmly ask the individual pertinent
         questions, such as the ones listed above, in a nonjudgmental manner to better
         understand their experiences and world. Furthermore, no matter how bizarre their
         answers may seem, simply listen without reacting one way or the other.
          Table 2.3 provides examples of “Do” and “Do Not” ways in which the clini-
         cian should respond to the client’s answers to their questions.
          The following is a case exemplar of an initial psychiatric evaluation that dem-
         onstrates how the diagnosis of schizophrenia is determined, including the ration-
         ales and treatment plan for it.                     
         Case Exemplar                                       
                                                             
         The client’s initials are KB.                       
                                                             
         A. Identification, Chief Complaint, and Reason for Referral
                                                             
         KB is a 51-year-old, English-speaking, Hispanic, divorced female who was
         brought to the emergency room (ER) by her son for a psychiatric evaluation and
         possible admission to the inpatient psychiatric unit. Her chief complaint is, “My
         son is conspiring against me and trying to lock me up in the hospital.” As per her
         son, his mother needs to be admitted to the hospital because she decompensated
         due to medication noncompliance and it was becoming increasingly difficult to
         manage her at home.                                 
         B. History of the Present Illness                   
                                                             
         During the interview, KB stated, “I am doing well and feeling fine.” The client ver-
         balized paranoid and delusional ideations of being followed by unknown people

=== Page 42 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 31
       and stated that her children are trying to poison her with medications. According
       to the client, she did not need to be admitted to the hospital and insisted that there
       were “powerful people” in the hospital who would hurt her. She expressed that
       she had to take action by “whistle blowing,” because hospital staff were helping
       these “powerful people” and turning her children against her and making them
       admit her to the hospital. She also claimed that she had to stop taking medications
       because her family gave her “poisonous medications.”  
         As per the patient’s son, KB has been decompensating over the past 2 months
       since she stopped taking the medications; she was getting increasingly paranoid
       and delusional, and would not drink water if her son touched the glass. At times,
       she would barricade herself in her room at night, and has not been able to sleep
       for the last several nights. This morning, she called the police and reported that
       her son was injecting her with medications under her toenails. A police officer
       went to her apartment and suggested that her son bring her to the local ER. In the
       ER, she was agitated and yelling at the son, “Why do you listen to them? Why do
       you want to hurt me?” The client denied suicidal/homicidal ideations, and denies
       auditory, visual, or tactile hallucinations. The client’s potential risk assessments
       were done with a general violence assessment and the Columbia-Suicide Severity
       Rating Scale; the results indicated low risk.         
        C. Past Psychiatric History                          
       KB refused to provide her past psychiatric history and said, “They know eve-
       rything about me here.” According to the son, the patient has a long history of
       mental illness and has been hospitalized multiple times in different hospitals in
       New York City. The son stated that his mother’s first episode of the illness was in
       her late 20s and since then she has been hospitalized intermittently. She has been
       prescribed different neuroleptics, but as per the son’s report, the best results were
       from Zyprexa (Olanzapine), which she stopped taking approximately 2 months
       ago. The medical records of previous admissions to the hospital were retrieved
       and reviewed. Findings indicated multiple admissions to the inpatient psychiatric
       unit: on 6/16/2008, 3/4/2009, 7/28/2013, 2/18/2015, 9/01/2017, and 10/15/2018.
       During each admission, the patient presented with paranoid delusions, basically
       due to noncompliance with medications. During the last admission, she presented
       with symptoms of paranoid delusions similar to this time, accusing her brothers,
       sisters, and sons of having malicious intention to hurt her and lock her up. She was
       admitted to the inpatient psychiatric unit on an involuntary status. She stabilized
       once the medications were resumed and was discharged ten days later.
        D. Substance Use History                             
       KB denied any history of substance use and the family confirmed the same. A
       urine toxicology was done, and the result was negative.
                                                             
        E. Social and Developmental History (supplemental information was obtained
          from the client’s previous medical records)

=== Page 43 (1 cols) ===
32 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         KB is residing with her two sons, who are supportive and understanding of her
         chronic mental illness. But she has alienated herself from other relatives and friends.
         KB denied any history of trauma, such as exposure to violence or childhood abuse.
                                                             
          1. Education: KB dropped out of high school in eleventh grade, and later
           obtained her General Education Diploma (GED) certificate.
          2. Family Relationship, Social Network, and Abuse History: KB was born in Puerto
           Rico and moved to New York City when she was 1 week old. She is the young-
           est of five siblings and several step-siblings, with whom she is not close. Her
           mother died when she was young; her father left the family soon after her birth.
           She was raised by her uncle, who sexually and physically abused her. She was
           married for 11 years to a physically abusive man and has two sons. She is
           divorced and resides with her sons in an apartment building in Brooklyn.
          3. Employment Record: KB has had various jobs: cashier at different supermar-
           kets, salesperson at a bridal shop, helper at a laundromat. However, due to
           her mental illness, she has not been able to work since 2000 and is currently
           on disability.                                    
          4. Legal Records: KB denies any problem with the law and denies any criminal
           records.                                          
          5. Religious Background: KB considers herself to be Catholic, but has not been
           an active member of any Catholic church and has not participated regularly
           in religious services.                            
          F. Family Psychiatric History                      
         As per KB’s report, her mother is deceased of unknown etiology, the father has a
         history of alcohol abuse, and her sister has been on medications for chronic psy-
         chosis. KB was not able to provide any additional details of family mental illness
         history. She denied any family history of suicidal or violent behaviors.
                                                             
         G. Medical History and Review of Systems            
                                                             
           1. No known allergies (NKA) or drug sensitivities.
           2. No significant past or current medical illnesses reported, and has not
              seen her primary care provider (PCP) for a regular physical examination
              in over a year.                                
           3. Overall, no significant observable physical abnormalities are noted via a
              review of systems, except for the son’s report that she is not eating regu-
              larly due to her paranoia and has lost 3–4 lbs within the last month or so.
           4. Vital signs: BP: 108/68; HR: 77; RR: 18; Temp: 36.6 C; Ht: 5’5”; Wt:
              110 lbs; body mass index [BMI]: 18.3.          
         H. Mental Status Examination                        
                                                             
           1. Appearance and Behavior: KB appears to be the stated age; general
              appearance is disheveled with poor hygiene; overall behavior is partially

=== Page 44 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 33
            cooperative with poor eye contact during the interview; her speech dem-
            onstrates fluency in English and Spanish, with a rapid and pressured
            speech pattern, and tangential and circumstantial thoughts.
          2. Mood: Labile, varying from angry and tearful to laughing.
          3. Affect: Irritable, guarded, and suspicious.     
          4. Thought Content and Process: Presence of paranoia and delusions with
            flight of ideas. Denied current suicidal ideas, plans, and intent, including
            active or passive thoughts of suicide or death. Denied current aggressive
            or violent thoughts.                             
          5. Perceptional Disturbances: Denied auditory, visual, and tactile
            hallucinations.                                  
          6. Sensorium, Cognitive, and Intellectual Functioning: KB is alert and ori-
            ented × 3. Attention span and concentration are limited, no insight into
            the illness with poor judgment. However, intellectual functioning is on
            average level.                                   
         I. Diagnosis and Treatment Plan                     
                                                             
          1. DSM-5 Diagnosis: Schizophrenia, multiple episodes, currently in acute
            episode.                                         
          2. Rationale for Diagnostic Impression: According to the DSM-5 (APA,
            2013), the following criteria must be present to diagnose schizophrenia.
            KB meets those criteria, as indicated by the bold symptom categories:
        A. Two (or more) of the following symptoms, each present for a significant
          portion of time during a 1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At
          least one of these must be 1, 2, or 3:             
          1. Delusions. KB manifested symptoms of paranoid delusions by not drink-
            ing water if her son had touched the glass, as she was afraid of being poi-
            soned; by barricading herself in her room at night; and by not being able to
            sleep for the last several nights due to the belief that her family would harm
            her. The morning of the evaluation, she called the police and reported that
            her son was injecting her with medications under her toenails.
          2. Hallucinations.                                 
          3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence). KB’s
            speech was incoherent and irrational, as evidenced by frequent jumping
            from one topic to another during the interview.  
          4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.     
          5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
        B. For a significant portion of time since the onset of the disturbance, the
          level of functioning in one or more major areas, such as work, interper-
          sonal relations, or self-care, is markedly below the level achieved prior to
          onset. KB presented a long history of mental illness starting in her late 20s,
          with multiple hospitalizations secondary to medication noncompliance. Due
          to her mental health illness, she has not been able to work since 2000 and is
          currently on disability.

=== Page 45 (1 cols) ===
34 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         C. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months. This
           6-month period must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if suc-
           cessfully treated) that meet Criterion A. KB’s symptoms returned each time
           she stopped her medications, leading to multiple hospitalizations, including
           this one; she stopped her medications 2 months ago and decompensated, with
           persecutory paranoid delusions and behavioral disturbances.
         D. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
           features have been ruled out because either (1) no major depressive or manic
           episodes have occurred concurrent with the active-phase symptoms, or (2) if
           mood episodes have occurred during the active-phase symptoms, they have
           been present for a minority of the total duration of the active and residual
           periods of the illness.                           
          E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of substance
           use (e.g., a drug or medication) or another medical condition.
          F. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder
           of childhood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if
           prominent delusions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symp-
           toms of schizophrenia, are present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully
           treated).                                         
             KB presented no history of major depressive or manic episodes and her
           symptoms did not appear to be attributable to the physiological effect of sub-
           stance use or of medical conditions. She has no history of autism spectrum
           disorder or of a communication disorder of childhood onset.
             Therefore, KB’s diagnostic impression meets the criteria for schizophre-
           nia with specifier—multiple episodes, currently in acute episode.
           3. Treatment Plan: Explain to the client and the family the appropriate
              treatment plan, including the diagnostic impression, risks of untreated
              illness, treatment options, benefits and risks of treatment, and the client
              treatment-related preferences:                 
              ·· Level of care: Inpatient hospitalization. Currently, KB presents an
                acute episode of schizophrenia with paranoid delusions and the ina-
                bility to care for self, and has no insight into her psychiatric condi-
                tions. Consequently, her level of functioning and quality of life have
                been compromised and, with the family’s consent, hospitalization is
                recommended for her safety.                  
              ·· Risk assessment of violence and aggressive behaviors toward self
                and/or others should be done to monitor potential harm.
              ·· Family involvement in the treatment plan, including the option of
                long-acting antipsychotic medication to reduce medication noncom-
                pliance, and exploring potential community and social supports to
                alleviate the burden on the family and reduce KB’s social isolation.
              ·· Medications: Resume antipsychotic medications, as they are
                effective and were well-tolerated in the past. KB has a history of

=== Page 46 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 35
               responding well to atypical antipsychotic medication (Zyprexa),
               which she tolerates well with no adverse reactions, but decom-
               pensated following medication noncompliance. Therefore, the
               same medication would be recommended. Zyprexa (Olanzapine)
               is a second-generation antipsychotic medication, designed to block
               postsynaptic dopamine receptors in the mesolimbic pathway, where
               dopamine antagonism is predominant, and to simultaneously pro-
               mote the release of dopamine from the presynaptic dopamine neu-
               ron in the mesocortical pathway in the brain, where less dopamine
               activity takes place.                         
                                                             
       Section 2: Depressive Disorders                       
       As shown in the previous section, the search for a diagnosis entails more than sim-
       ply determining what it is; through the process of conducting a diagnostic inter-
       view, the APMHN aims to understand the manner in which the client experiences
       the world. Therefore, this section will emphasize the search for an understanding
       of depressive phenomena, exploring more fully the impact that symptoms inflict
       on the depressed individual’s life, and that same process can and should be uti-
       lized for other mental health disorders as well. In terms of depression specifically,
       the more the APMHN understands that it is a process that constantly unfolds
       and manifests in phenomena that affect numerous systems outside the depressed
       individual, the more the clinician can sharpen their interviewing skills to catch the
       subtle clues suggesting depression. Ultimately, the APMHN’s sensitivity will be
       enhanced, as will the therapeutic engagement with clients.
         Depressive disorders as a primary diagnosis for adults are categorized in the
       DSM-5 (APA, 2013) as (1) major depressive disorder (MDD), including a major
       depressive episode, which is considered the classic condition in this group of
       disorders; (2) persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia); and (3) premenstrual
       dysphoric disorder. The common feature of all these disorders is the presence of
       sad, empty, or irritable mood, accompanied by somatic and cognitive changes that
       significantly affect the person’s capacity to function. What differs among them are
       issues of duration, timing, or presumed etiology (Table 2.4).
         MDD is one of the most prevalent mental disorders worldwide; lifetime prev-
       alence rates range between 8% and 12% for most countries (Kessler & Bromet,
       Table 2.4 Differential Diagnosis among Depressive Disorders in Adults Based on Duration
                                                             
       Diagnosis         Duration                            
       Major depressive disorder A minimum of 2 weeks        
       Persistent depressive disorder A minimum of 2 years   
       Premenstrual dysphoric disorder Begins following ovulation and remits within a few
                           days of menses

=== Page 47 (1 cols) ===
36 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         2013). In the United States, the 12-month prevalence rate is approximately 7%,
         and the prevalence rate in 18- to 29-year-old individuals is three times that of
         those aged 60 years or older. Women experience 1.5–3.0 times higher rates than
         do men (APA, 2013). A National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) survey
         reported that in 2019, 18.5% of adults had symptoms of depression, lasting at
         least 2 weeks, that were either mild, moderate, or severe (see E3 below), and
         that women were more likely than men to experience depressive symptoms. A
         study by Villarroel and Terlizzi (2020) indicated that the percentage of adults
         who experienced any symptoms of depression was highest among those aged
         18–29 (21.0%), followed by 45–64 (18.4%), 65 and over (18.4%), and 30–44
         (16.8%).                                            
          In this section, MDD, the most prevalent depressive disorder, will be used as
         an example to address mental status assessment and diagnostic evaluation for
         depressive disorders more broadly.                  
                                                             
         Diagnostic Criteria                                 
         DSM-5 (APA, 2013) Major Depressive Disorder         
         Diagnostic Criteria Modified                        
                                                             
         A. Signs and Symptoms: Presents five (or more) of the following signs and
           symptoms nearly every day, including at least Criterion 1 or 2:
           1. Depressed mood most of the day, subjective report of feeling sadness,
              emptiness, hopelessness, or observation made by others, such as tearful
              appearance.                                    
           2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities
              most of the day.                               
           3. Appetite-related significant weight change (more than 5% of body
              weight loss or gain in a month) when not dieting.
           4. Sleep disturbance (insomnia or hypersomnia).   
           5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation.          
           6. Fatigue or loss of energy.                     
           7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt.
           8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness.
           9. Recurrent thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal ideation without a spe-
              cific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.
         B. Duration: Five (or more) of the above signs or symptoms present during the
           same 2-week period, representing a change from previous functioning.
         C. Impairment in Function: The symptoms cause clinically significant distress
           or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
         D. Differential Diagnosis: Careful consideration should be given to the delinea-
           tion of normal sadness and grief from a major depressive episode. For exam-
           ple, bereavement may induce great suffering, but it does not typically induce
           an episode of MDD. In distinguishing grief from a major depressive epi-
           sode, it is useful to consider that in grief, the predominant affect is feelings

=== Page 48 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 37
          of emptiness and loss, while in a major depressive episode it is persistent
          depressed mood and the inability to anticipate happiness or pleasure.
        E. Diagnostic Recording: In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should
          be listed in the following order for clinical consistency:
          1. Major depressive disorder.                      
          2. Single or recurrent episode.                    
          3. Severity specifiers: Current severity specifiers are based on the number
            of criterion symptoms, the severity of those symptoms, and the degree of
            functional disability:                           
             a. Mild: Few symptoms in excess of those required to make the diag-
               nosis are present, symptom intensity is distressing but manageable,
               and the symptoms result in minor impairment to social or occupa-
               tional functioning.                           
            b. Moderate: The number of symptoms, intensity of symptoms, and/
               or functional impairment are between those specified for “mild” and
               “severe.”                                     
             c. Severe: The number of symptoms is substantially in excess of that
               required to make the diagnosis, symptom intensity is seriously dis-
               tressing and unmanageable, and the symptoms markedly interfere
               with social and occupational functioning.     
       In addition to understanding the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for depressive disor-
       ders, it is essential that APMHNs have a working knowledge of its neurobiologi-
       cal basis, especially the role of brain circuits and related symptom dimensions,
       to understand how psychotropic medications are used in its treatment. Box 2.2
       summarizes the neurobiological theories of depressive disorders.
                                                             
                                                             
         Box 2.2 Neurobiological Theories of Depressive Disorders
                                                             
         From a clinical perspective, the most influential neurobiological discoveries
         related to depression have probably been neurotransmitter-related abnor-
         malities, with the monoamines (serotonin, noradrenaline, and dopamine)
         having received most attention in the development of antidepressants to
         relieve depressive symptoms. Yet, despite the current primary focus on
         monoamines, there is accumulating evidence that changes in other neuro-
         transmitter systems can also be associated with depression, specifically the
         gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) system (Kaltenboeck & Harmer, 2018).
         Monoamine hypothesis                                
                                                             
         The classic theory about the neurobiological etiology of depression hypoth-
         esizes that it is due to a deficiency of three key monoamine neurotransmitters

=== Page 49 (1 cols) ===
38 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                                                             
          (serotonin, norepinephrine [NE], and dopamine), which may lead to mal-
          functioning of information processing in various brain regions. Currently,
          the monoamine hypothesis of depression is applied to understand how mon-
          oamine regulates the efficiency of information processing in a wide variety
          of neuronal circuits in the specific brain regions that may be responsible for
          medicating the various symptoms of depression (Stahl, 2013).
            Table 2.5 presents each of the nine symptom criteria listed in the DSM-5
          to diagnose an individual’s MDD, hypothetically associated with the func-
          tionality of each brain region.                    
            There are many brain areas where the key neurotransmitters’ (seroto-
          nin, norepinephrine, and dopamine) projections overlap, creating oppor-
          tunities for monoamine interactions throughout the brain (see Table 2.2).
          The monoamine hypothesis of depression posits that if a sufficient amount
          of monoamine neurotransmitter activity becomes reduced, depleted, or
          dysfunctional, depression may ensue. Numerous known inter-regulatory
          pathways and receptor interactions exist among the three monoaminer-
          gic neurotransmitter systems that enable them to influence each other and
          change the release not only of their own neurotransmitters, but also of other
          monoamines (Stahl, 2013). However, direct evidence of this hypothesis is
          still largely lacking. Regardless, a basic understanding of these neurotrans-
          mitters’ projection pathways in the brain regions associated with symptoms
          of depression (as shown in Table 2.6) will build a strong foundation for the
          APMHN to translate neurobiological theories into clinical practice.
           Table 2.5 Nine Symptom Criteria of Major Depressive Disorder and Associated
                 Brain Regions Listed in the DSM-5           
           Symptom Criteria of Major Depression Disorder Brain Regions
                                                             
           Depressed mood            Prefrontal cortex (PFC) 
           Diminished interest or pleasure Nucleus accumbens (NA)
           Appetite-related body weight loss or gain Hypothalamus (HY)
           Sleep disturbance (insomnia or hypersomnia) Hypothalamus (HY)
                                     Basal forebrain (BF)    
                                     Thalamus (T)            
           Psychomotor agitation or retardation Prefrontal cortex (PFC)
                                     Cerebellum (C)          
           Fatigue or loss of energy Striatum (S)            
                                     Spinal cord (SC)        
           Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inap- Prefrontal cortex (PFC)
             propriate guilt         Amygdala (A)            
           Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or Prefrontal cortex (PFC)
             indecisiveness          Hippocampus (H)         
           Recurrent thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal Prefrontal cortex (PFC)
             ideation/plan/attempt   Amygdala (A)

=== Page 50 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 39
                                                             
         Table 2.6 Three Key Neurotransmitters’ Projection Pathways Associated with
               Symptoms of Depression                        
         Neurotransmitter Projection Origin Projection Symptoms of
                               Terminal Depression           
         Serotonin (5HT)       PFC, BF, S, Regulate mood, anxi-
         • Ascending Brain stem NA, T,  ety, sleep, arousal, 
                                HY, A, H, cognition, and other
                                NT, C   functions listed in  
                                        Table 2.1            
         • Descending Brain stem SC   Regulate pain pathways 
         Norepinephrine (NE)   PFC, BF, T, Regulate mood, arousal,
         • Ascending Locus coeruleus of HY, A, H, cognition, and other
                      the brain stem NT, C functions listed in
                                        Table 2.1            
         • Descending Locus coeruleus of SC Regulate pain pathways
                      the brain stem                         
         Dopamine (DA)         Extend via H See the dopamine-
         • Widespread Brain stem par- to PFC, BF, associated psychotic
           ascending  tially ventral S, NA, and symptoms     
           projection tegmental and PFC, BF, T,              
                      substantia nigra HY, A, H              
         • Other projections Thalamus dopa- Thalamus Arousal and sleep
                      minergic system                        
         Source: Adapted from Stahl (2013).                  
         Neurotrophic hypothesis                             
         The neurotrophic hypothesis of depression is based on the assumption
         that monoamine signaling and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
         release play a role in the proper growth and maintenance of neurons and
         neuronal connections (Stahl, 2013). Studies have highlighted a potential
         role for BDNF to contribute to the pathophysiology of depression, which
         may be caused by reduced synthesis of proteins involved in neurogenesis
         and synaptic plasticity. And treatment of depression is based on the assump-
         tion that antidepressant affect on BDNF expression in cortical and subcorti-
         cal brain regions is implicated in reversing neuronal atrophy, neurogenic
         decline, and enhanced despair (Jaggar et al., 2019). A hyperactivation of
         the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis has been found in 50% of
         depressed patients, and a significant decrease of BDNF levels has been
         demonstrated in depressed patients (Guerrera et al., 2020).
         Glutamate hypothesis                                
         Despite the availability of multiple classes of drugs that act upon monoam-
         ine-based mechanisms, studies indicate that at least 20–30% of subjects do

=== Page 51 (1 cols) ===
40 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                                                             
          not attain early improvement or remission after 4–12 weeks of treatment and
          fail to achieve a sustained remission of depressive symptoms (De Vries et
          al., 2019). The focus for improved pharmacotherapies for treatment-resistant
          depression, thus, has shifted to a neuroplasticity hypothesis focused on gluta-
          mate, which represents a substantial advancement in the working hypothesis
          that drives research for new drugs and therapies. In particular, studies show-
          ing that the glutamatergic modulator ketamine elicits fast-acting, robust, and
          relatively sustained antidepressant, antisuicidal, and antianhedonic effects
          in individuals with treatment-resistant depression have prompted interest
          in understanding the mechanisms responsible for ketamine’s clinical effi-
          cacy (Kadriu et al., 2019). Much of this interest revolves around glutamate’s
          role in regulating synaptic connectivity and signaling mechanisms by either
          inhibitory or excitatory proteins. It is based on the belief that during synaptic
          formation, a burst of glutamate is released, activating postsynaptic recep-
          tors, which in turn trigger downstream pathways that influence dendritic
          spine density, synaptic formation, and connectivity (Stahl, 2013).
                                                             
         Interviewing Techniques in Assessment of Depressive Disorders
         As discussed in Shea’s (1998) Psychiatric Interviewing, to fully understand depres-
         sion in the initial interview, depressed clients’ experiences can be compartmental-
         ized into various subsystems: (1) physiologic system, (2) psychological system, (3)
         dyadic system, and (4) family and other group systems, each of which should be
         explored to the extent possible to enable the APMHN to make an accurate diagnosis.
                                                             
          1. Physiologic system is applied to the following DSM-5 signs and symp-
           toms of depression: appetite and sleep disturbances, psychomotor agitation
           or retardation, and fatigue or loss of energy. These experiences of altered
           functioning can become immensely disturbing to the client. With the client’s
           experiences in mind, the following samples of clinician questions may add
           depth to the interview:                           
           a. What has your body felt like to you recently?  
           b. What does it feel like to you to have lost your energy and drive?
           c. Do you feel that you have lost your energy, your appetite, and your abil-
              ity to sleep for the past 2 weeks?             
           d. How have all these changes made you feel about yourself?
         These types of questions not only allow a client the chance to vent, but also
         emphasize that the APMHN is interested in them as a unique individual whose
         depression they alone can explain.                  
          2. Alteration in psychological system is divided into four broad areas, with
           each area linked to DSM-5 diagnostic symptoms and recommended clinician
           approaches. See Table 2.7 for a detailed explanation of each.

=== Page 52 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 41
                                                             
       Table 2.7 Psychological Systems Linked to DSM-5 Diagnostic Symptoms and
             Recommended Clinician Approaches                
       Psychological DSM-5 Diagnostic Symptom Recommended Clinician Approach
       Area     Criteria                                     
       Perception of                                         
         the world                                           
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Cognitive                                             
         processes                                           
                                                             
                                                             
       Thought                                               
         content                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Psychodynamic                                         
         defenses                                            
                Depressed mood with feelings                 
                 of sadness, emptiness,                      
                 hopelessness                                
                Diminished ability to                        
                 think or concentrate, or                    
                 indecisiveness, along with                  
                 rumination and worries                      
                 about the past, the present,                
                 and the future                              
                Thoughts of worthlessness or                 
                 excessive or inappropriate                  
                 guilt, along with loneliness,               
                 self-loathing, hopelessness,                
                 and helplessness                            
                Recurrent thoughts of death,                 
                 recurrent suicidal ideation                 
                 without a specific plan, or a               
                 suicide attempt or a specific               
                 plan for committing suicide                 
                This part is not included in the             
                 DSM-5 symptom criteria.                     
                 But these defenses are                      
                 common among depressed                      
                 clients, such as denial,                    
                 repression, rationalization,                
                 or isolation                                
                                To fully grasp a feature of the depressed
                                 client’s perception of their world, the
                                 clinician needs to enter the depressed
                                 client’s world as best as possible; at
                                 times, when the client has difficulty
                                 in responding, the clinician needs to
                                 be more active while accepting the
                                 client’s difficulty with patience
                                Acknowledge the client’s thoughts
                                 and allow them to vent while
                                 simultaneously refocusing the client’s
                                 thinking process            
                                The clinician needs to be keenly aware
                                 of the potential risk of suicide;
                                 depending on the severity of
                                 these symptoms, probing with the
                                 following questions may help the
                                 clinician to assess the intensity of
                                 suicidal risk: “At this time, what
                                 kinds of ways of getting help do you
                                 see for yourself?” and “What do
                                 you see for yourself in the future?”;
                                 if needed, consider using a suicide
                                 assessment instrument, such as the
                                 Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating
                                 Scale (C-SSRS)              
                                Careful questioning will often
                                 uncover the depression by eliciting
                                 neurovegetative symptoms or 
                                 evidence of depressive cognitive
                                 functioning                 
        3. A dyadic system is created when two people interact. Depression, though,
          alters the interpersonal field; symptoms of depression, such as lack of motiva-
          tion, social isolation, or avoidance, decrease the quality of a person’s interac-
          tion with others, who in turn may treat the depressed person with reservation.
          Alternately, the dyadic system of the depressed person may be restricted,
          diminishing the chance to gain positive reinforcement from others and conse-
          quently creating a world lacking in reward for interactions with others. This
          unhealthy cycle of the dyadic system in the depressed person can lead to a
          learned helplessness, in which the depression ensures its own survival.

=== Page 53 (1 cols) ===
42 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         The APMHN can search for evidence of disturbances in the depressed client’s
         dyadic system and of learned helplessness with the following questions:
                                                             
          a. Do you find yourself going out as frequently as you used to?
          b. Tell me what it is like for you when you are around people at work?
          c. When you talk with people, what kinds of feelings do you have, for instance
           if you meet a friend on the street?               
          d. How do people seem to be treating you?          
          e. Do you find yourself easily irritated or “flying off the handle” recently?
          f. Does it require much energy to be around people, such as your friends?
         It is important for the APMHN to be aware that not only are the client’s family
         and friends affected by the client’s depression, but the treating clinician may be as
         well. It is therefore beneficial for the APMHN to periodically reflect on their own
         emotional responses by:                             
                                                             
          a. Being keenly aware of their own negative and/or positive feelings, including
           overly empathic feelings toward a depressed client, which can seriously dam-
           age the therapeutic engagement, and/or            
          b. Adjusting to the needs of the client by utilizing continuous and adaptive
           creativity.                                       
         For example, when interviewing crying clients, the APMHN can be both empathic
         and professional, as demonstrated by the following responses:
                                                             
         #1 Client: (Tears coming down, but obviously trying not to cry.)
         APMHN: “You seem sad right now. Are you trying not to cry?” (Said with a soft
           tone and also offering the client a chance to vent, thus decreasing a sense of
           discomfort.)                                      
         #2 Client: (Uncontrollable crying.)                 
         APMHN: “What you are going through is obviously very upsetting and would be
           to anybody. Take a moment to collect yourself. It’s important for us to talk
           more about what has happened to you.”             
         In both situations, training in self-reflection by searching for answers to questions,
         such as the following, may enhance the APMHN’s interviewing skills:
         ·· What do I feel when someone cries?               
         ·· Do I ever perceive crying people as weak or ineffectual?
         ·· How often do I cry and how do I feel about myself when I do?
         ·· Have I ever seen my parents, family, or friends cry, and how did I feel then?
                                                             
         Generally acknowledged emotions commonly felt by clinicians are sympathy,
         empathy, and a desire to help. Additionally, a clinician’s training in how to effec-
         tively recognize and deal with transference and countertransference will enhance
         their ability to effectively deal with the client’s emotions.

=== Page 54 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 43
        4. Family and other group systems are important dynamics for the APMHN to
          explore to understand how the client’s depression may affect other aspects of
          their life, such as the job environment or social organizations.
                                                             
       The impact of depression on family members and/or significant others, if any, is
       usually assessed in the initial interview. Family tensions may be spontaneously
       brought up by the client. At other times, skillful questions may be needed to illu-
       minate these issues. Sample questions such as the following may be a good start:
        a. Who in your family seems to understand you?       
        b. Who in your family are you concerned about right now?
        c. How do you think your family members view your depression?
        d. What kinds of suggestions have your family members been making to you
          about how to feel better?                          
        e. What kinds of pressures has your spouse or partner been coping with recently?
       Probing but open-ended questions, such as the above, will often yield information
       about the state of the family and may elicit interpersonal tensions toward specific
       family members, whereas more direct questions might elicit denial. Additionally,
       through this type of questioning, the APMHN may also learn valuable informa-
       tion about situational stressors in the family system.
         Reflections of depression can be seen in group systems affected by changes in the
       client, such as a job environment or social networks (e.g., conflict with supervisor,
       poor performance at the job, avoidance of going out with friends). In addition, a dis-
       turbance in one system may affect other systems by acting as a major stressor which
       triggers the depression, as well as leaving its mark throughout all these interlocking
       systems (e.g., loss of a house from natural disaster leading to financial constraints).
         The following is a sample case exemplar of the initial psychiatric evaluation,
       including how the diagnosis of MDD is determined, along with the proposed
       treatment plan and rationales.                        
       Case Exemplar                                         
       The client’s initials are JO.                         
                                                             
        A. Identification, Chief Complaint, and Reason for Referral
          JO is a 35-year-old, Hispanic, single mother with a 17-year-old son and
          5-year-old twin sons. She is currently employed as a medical assistant and
          has been working at the same clinic for the past 13 years. She was referred to
          the mental health clinic by the twin sons’ therapist and presents with the chief
          complaint “I feel unorganized and drained.” She is well groomed and neatly
          dressed in her uniform from work.                  
                                                             
        B. History of Present Illness                        
          JO reported that she has been grieving the loss of her mother, who passed away
          a year ago. She has also been under a lot of stress due to losing a potential new

=== Page 55 (1 cols) ===
44 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
           career opportunity to be a police officer, an ongoing battle with the father of
           her twin sons, who left 2 years ago, and dealing with her twin sons’ behavio-
           ral problems due to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
             JO stated that since the death of her mother, she has been disorganized and
           feeling totally drained physically. She grieves every day, misses her all the
           time, has difficulty accepting the mother’s death, and still exhibits disbelief
           that she is gone. JO claimed that she has been crying all the time and avoiding
           visiting the mother’s apartment, where her brother now resides. She reports
           loneliness and has detached herself from her siblings, stating, “my circle of
           surroundings just gets smaller and smaller.” She also expressed great disap-
           pointment over being rejected by the police academy, where she had studied
           and trained for a long time to become a police officer, due to an incident of
           smoking marijuana once last summer. She admitted to having a substance use
           problem, but maintained that she had been abstinent for 5 years until this one
           episode. An additional stress is that both of her twin sons were diagnosed with
           ADHD and have behavioral problems at school; the teacher has reported that
           they kick and hit other children, and also cry and hit themselves. JO stated that
           dealing with all these issues has left her feeling exhausted and with no energy,
           and reported eating more and gaining weight (7 lbs within 2 months). She no
           longer does things she used to enjoy, such as going to the gym. She has been
           waking up in the middle of the night and has difficulty falling back to sleep.
             During the interview, JO was initially anxious and irritable, but calmed
           down once she was able to engage in the conversation. She was cooperative
           and spontaneous in her responses to the questions.
         C. Past Psychiatric History                         
           When JO was 15 years old, she suffered from depression following the death
           of her father and took an overdose of unknown pills, which led to her being
           hospitalized for 3 days. Following discharge, she had some form of therapy,
           mostly via phone, and was prescribed medication (name unknown), but did
           not take it because she was afraid of potential side effects.
         D. Substance Use History                            
           JO reported that she smoked marijuana regularly for 5 years when she was
           with the twins’ father so that they “would have something in common,” but
           stopped when he left, except for one instance last summer when she smoked
           with her brother, as they were both very depressed following the death of
           their mother and he wanted her to smoke with him. 
                                                             
          E. Social and Developmental History                
           1. Education: Dropped out of high school 3 months prior to graduation
              but obtained her GED certificate. Two years ago, she entered the police
              academy, but was expelled due to positive drug testing.
           2. Family Relationship, Social Network, and Abuse History: JO was never
              married, had her first son at age 18 years old, and the twin boys at age 30

=== Page 56 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 45
            years old by a different father. She is not in contact with either father nor is
            she currently in a relationship. She has two brothers and two sisters; has a
            close relationship with one brother, but no contact with the other siblings.
            JO reported that she was physically and sexually abused when she was
          10 years old while placed in foster care. Additionally, she was raped by her
          cousin (reluctant to reveal detailed information) and was emotionally abused
          by the father of the twins.                        
          3. Employment Record: JO has been working as a full-time medical assis-
            tant for the past 13 years. She claims to be a hard worker who rarely
            misses a day of work.                            
          4. Legal Record: Denied having one.                
          5. Religious Background: Although raised Catholic, JO started to attend
            Baptist services with a friend to be with people following the mother’s
            death, and was recently baptized in the Baptist Church.
        F. Family Psychiatric History                        
          JO reported that:                                  
          1. Her mother, maternal grandmother, and maternal aunt were diagnosed as
            “manic depressives,” but was not clear whether any of them took medi-
            cation except for the grandmother, who took “pills all her life.”
          2. A significant family history of substance use—both parents and 8 of her
            11 maternal aunts and uncles were “drug addicts.”
          3. Oldest brother “emotionally disturbed,” with a history of murdering
            someone years ago and being incarcerated for 13 years.
          4. Other brother and sisters have no known psychiatric history.
          5. One nephew diagnosed as schizophrenic.          
          6. Five-year-old twin boys, both diagnosed with ADHD and on Adderall.
          7. Seventeen-year-old son: Two suicide attempts by taking pills and was
            admitted × 2 days after the last episode, which was last year.
        G. Medical History                                   
          Last physical exam was 3 months ago. With her permission, the APMHN will
          obtain a copy of the results. JO reported that:    
          1. She was diagnosed with hypothyroidism and is currently on Synthroid
            (unclear the dosage). Other than that, no known physical illnesses are
            reported and no visually noticeable abnormalities noted.
          2. No known allergies reported.                    
          3. Weight: 154 lbs, gained 14 lbs within last month; height: 5′5″; BMI 26.
        H. Mental Status Examination                         
                                                             
          1. Appearance and Behavior: The client was neatly dressed in her work
            uniform, good hygiene with hair neatly pulled back. She made good eye
            contact and was cooperative throughout the entire interview.
          2. Mood: She stated that she felt “unorganized and drained.” She appeared
            a little anxious at the beginning of the interview, but seemed to relax as
            time went on.

=== Page 57 (1 cols) ===
46 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
           3. Affect: Her affect was appropriate to the current situation, and congruent
              to mood and thought contents.                  
           4. Thought Content and Process: Speech was initially rapid, but after a few
              minutes, it slowed down to normal speed. Thought contents indicated no
              evidence of loose associations, tangential thought, thought blocking, or
              other signs of a formal thought disorder, including delusions or ideas of
              reference. Denied suicidal or homicidal ideations/intents/plans.
           5. Perceptual Disturbances: She denies auditory, visual, or tactile
              hallucinations.                                
           6. Sensorium, Cognitive, and Intellectual Functioning: JO was alert and
              oriented × 3. There was no evidence of gross cognitive dysfunction
              at any point during the interview. She demonstrated some insight and
              seemed to be motivated for treatment.          
          I. Diagnosis and Treatment Plan                    
           1. DSM-5 Diagnosis: MDD, moderate.                
           2. Rationale for Diagnostic Impression: According to the DSM-5 (APA,
              2013), to determine a diagnosis of MDD, the client must meet the follow-
              ing criteria, which JO meets as indicated by the bold symptom categories:
         A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms present nearly every day and at
           least one of the following 1 or 2 below criteria must be present:
           1. Depressed mood most of the day:                
              a. Subjective report of feelings of sadness, emptiness, hopelessness, or
              b. Observation made by others, such as tearful appearance.
                  JO tears up easily, reports feelings of sadness and emptiness, and
                is isolating herself from her siblings.      
           2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities
              most of the day. JO reports that she no longer does things she used to
              enjoy.                                         
           3. Appetite-related significant weight change (more than 5% of body
              weight loss or gain in a month when not dieting). JO has been eating
              more and has gained 14 lbs (10% of her weight) within the last 2 months.
           4. Sleep disturbance (insomnia or hypersomnia). JO has been waking up in
              the middle of the night and has difficulty falling back to sleep.
           5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation.          
           6. Fatigue or loss of energy. JO feels that most days she doesn’t have
              enough energy to do anything.                  
           7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt.
           8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness.
           9. Recurrent thoughts of death, recurrent suicidal ideation without a spe-
              cific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.
         B. Duration: Five (or more) of the above signs or symptoms present during the
           same 2-week period. JO reported that she has not been well since her mother’s
           death a year ago, and her symptoms have been worse for the last 2 months.

=== Page 58 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 47
        C. Impairment in Function: The symptoms cause clinically significant dis-
          tress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
          functioning. JO has been able to go to work regularly and perform her
          job functions; however, her relationship with family members, especially
          involving her twin sons and their father, has been highly stressful for her, as
          has been taking care of her children, who are also suffering from mental ill-
          nesses. Her weight gain due to overeating has led to her become overweight
          (BMI 26).                                          
        D. Differential Diagnosis. Careful consideration should be given to the delinea-
          tion of normal sadness and grief from a major depressive episode. For exam-
          ple, bereavement may induce great suffering, but it does not typically induce
          an episode of MDD. In distinguishing grief from a major depressive episode,
          it is useful to consider that in grief, the predominant affect is feelings of emp-
          tiness and loss, while in a major depressive episode it is persistent depressed
          mood and the inability to anticipate happiness or pleasure.
            Since the mother’s death a year ago, in addition to feelings of sadness
          and emptiness, JO’s depressed mood has been persistent. She is unable to
          experience pleasure, and has had prolonged sleep and appetite disturbances.
          Also, she has a history of depression, and multiple stress factors in her life
          exacerbate the symptoms of depression and anxiety. 
        E. Diagnostic Recording. In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be
          listed in the following order for clinical consistency:
          1. Major depressive disorder: JO met five MDD symptom criteria.
          2. Single or recurrent episode: JO had a previous episode of MDD.
          3. Severity specifiers: JO met moderate severity based on the intensity
            of the symptoms as distressing but manageable, and that the symp-
            toms have resulted in moderate impairment in social or occupational
            functioning.                                     
            Therefore, JO’s diagnostic impression meets the criteria for a diagnosis of
          MDD, recurrent episode, moderate.                  
            3. Treatment Plan and Summary:                   
                 Despite the diagnosis and one previous suicide attempt, JO is
               not considered to be a suicidal or homicidal risk, as evidenced by
               her denial of ideation/intent/plan, abstaining from substance use or
               abuse, genuinely seeking help for herself, and genuinely wanting
               to help her children. As JO is averse to medications to treat her
               depression with anxious distress, her treatment plan can be opti-
               mally served by a multifaceted approach, especially addressing the
               stressors in her life. It is believed that stress in those who have had
               multiple traumas can result in decreased activation of the prefrontal
               cortex; mindfulness therapy can help to activate this area and can be
               helpful in enhancing control over emotions (van der Kolk, 2006).
               Another consideration is to recommend that JO also join a bereave-
               ment support group, as such a group can help with difficulties with

=== Page 59 (1 cols) ===
48 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                the grieving process. According to Zisook (2005), bereavement
                support groups provide “personal contact, information, an opportu-
                nity to share coping techniques, a sense of universality and belong-
                ing, increased self-worth, reinforcement for positive change, and
                an opportunity to help others.” Interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT)
                might be useful, as JO has a number of responsibilities in her life
                and IPT is time limited and focused. With IPT, the therapist is
                active and proactive, while the change is the responsibility of the
                client (Barry, 2005). Lastly, JO’s weight gain should be addressed,
                and it should be recommended that she follow up with her primary
                care provider to manage her hypothyroidism.  
                                                             
                                                             
         Section 3: Bipolar Disorders                        
         Bipolar disorders are marked by severe mood swings between depression and
         elation, exhibited during distinct periods of abnormally and persistently elevated,
         expansive, or irritable mood, and accompanied with increased goal-directed activ-
         ity or energy during an elation period. There are three major categories of bipolar
         disorders: (1) bipolar I: full manic or mixed episode, usually with a major depres-
         sive episode; (2) bipolar II: a major depressive episode and hypomanic episode
         (less intense than mania); and (3) cyclothymic disorder: a less severe type of bipo-
         lar disorder (Sadock & Sadock, 2010). According to the DSM-5 (APA, 2013), the
         estimated 12-month prevalence in the United States of bipolar I disorder is 0.6%,
         of bipolar II is 0.8%, and of cyclothymic disorder is 0.4–1%. Based on diagnostic
         interview data from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R), an
         estimated 4.4% of US adults experience bipolar disorder at some time in their
         lives (Information for Practice, 2012.). The effects of bipolar disorder can be far-
         reaching, both in the lives of clients and of their families, including work, school,
         relationships, finance, physical health, and many other aspects of everyday life.
         The most severe effect of bipolar disorder is suicide; 25–50% of people with bipo-
         lar disorder attempt suicide and 11% commit suicide (Tracy, 2012). Therefore,
         diagnoses included in this section are bipolar I and bipolar II, which will be used
         as examples of diagnostic assessment and evaluation, including treatment plans.
         The diagnostic criteria of bipolar disorders are modified from the DSM-5 (APA,
         2013).                                              
         Diagnostic Criteria                                 
         The DSM-5 classifies bipolar disorders’ diagnostic criteria presenting for manic
         and hypomanic episodes first, followed by criteria for bipolar I disorder and bipo-
         lar II disorder. The following description of the diagnostic criteria of both bipolar
         disorders does not present a major depressive episode, as that is described in the
         previous section.

=== Page 60 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 49
       DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria: Manic Episode Modified     
        A. Signs and Symptoms:                               
          1. Elevated/expansive mood or irritable mood, and increased goal-directed
            activity or energy, and                          
          2. Presents three (or more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is
            irritable) to a significant degree, which represents a noticeable change
            from usual behavior:                             
             a. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.         
            b. Decreased need for sleep.                     
             c. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
            d. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
             e. Distractibility, as reported or observed.    
             f. Increased goal-directed activity or psychomotor agitation.
            g. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for
               painful consequences (e.g., unrestrained buying sprees, foolish busi-
               ness investment, or sexual indiscretions).    
          B. Duration: Increased energy/activities presenting most of the day, nearly
            every day, for at least 1 week.                  
          C. Impairment in Function: The mood disturbance is sufficiently severe
            to cause marked impairment in social or occupational function, or to
            necessitate hospitalization to prevent harm to self or others, or there are
            psychotic features.                              
          D. Differential Diagnosis:                         
            1. Substance use/medication/other treatment-induced (e.g., drug abuse,
               antidepressant, electroconvulsive therapy) manic symptoms must be
               distinguished from bipolar I disorder.        
            2. Criteria A–C constitute a manic episode and at least one manic epi-
               sode is required for the diagnosis of bipolar disorder.
       DSM-5 Diagnostic Criteria: Hypomanic Episode Modified 
        A. Signs and Symptoms:                               
          1. Elevated/expansive mood or irritable mood, and increased goal-directed
            activity or energy.                              
          2. Presents three (or more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is
            irritable) to a significant degree, which represents a noticeable change
            from usual behavior:                             
             a. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.         
            b. Decreased need for sleep.                     
             c. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
            d. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
             e. Distractibility, as reported or observed.    
             f. Increased goal-directed activity or psychomotor agitation.

=== Page 61 (1 cols) ===
50 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
              g. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for
                painful consequences (e.g., unrestrained buying sprees, foolish busi-
                ness investment, or sexual indiscretions).   
         B. Duration: Increased energy/activities presenting most of the day, nearly
           every day, for at least 4 consecutive days.       
         C. Impairment in Function:                          
           1. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social
              or occupational function or to necessitate hospitalization to prevent harm
              to self or others, nor are there psychotic features.
           2. An equivocal change in functioning that is uncharacteristic of the indi-
              vidual when not symptomatic, but the changes in mood and functioning
              are observable by others.                      
           3. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social
              or occupational function nor to necessitate hospitalization.
         DSM-5 Bipolar I Disorder Diagnostic Criteria Modified
                                                             
         A. For a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, it is necessary to meet the criteria of at
           least one manic episode currently or in the past. Major depressive episodes
           are common in bipolar I disorder but are not required for its diagnosis.
         B. Diagnostic recording: The diagnostic code for bipolar I disorder is based
           on the type of current or most recent episode, its severity (mild, moder-
           ate, or severe), and the presence of psychotic features, if indicated. In
           recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following
           order: Bipolar I disorder, type of episode (i.e., current or recent or remis-
           sion), severity, psychotic features (if present), and specifiers (details of the
           descriptions of severity and type of episode can be found in the DSM-5,
           pages 126–127).                                   
         DSM-5 Bipolar II Disorder Diagnostic Criteria Modified
                                                             
         A. For a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, it is necessary to have at least one hypo-
           manic episode and at least one major depressive episode.
         B. There has never been a manic episode.            
         C. The symptoms of depression or the unpredictability caused by frequent
           alternation between periods of depression or hypomania causes significant
           distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
           functioning.                                      
         D. Diagnostic recording: Bipolar II disorder is coded with its status with cur-
           rent severity (mild, moderate, or severe), the presence of psychotic features,
           its course, and other specifiers. It should be recorded in the following order:
           Bipolar II disorder, most recent episode between hypomanic and depressed,
           in partial or full remission (if indicated), with specifiers between anxious

=== Page 62 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 51
          distress and mixed features (details of the descriptions of severity, type of
          current and recent episodes, and specifiers can be found in the DSM-5, pages
          134–135).                                          
                                                             
                                                             
       Differential Diagnosis:                               
        A. Substance-/medication-induced hypomanic symptoms must be distinguished
          from bipolar disorders.                            
        B. If there are psychotic features, the episode is, by definition, manic; therefore,
          it is bipolar I disorder.                          
        C. There are no differences between the signs and symptoms of bipolar I and
          bipolar II disorders, but any past episodes of mania, the severity of functional
          impairment, and the duration of the episode are key to differentiating between
          either and cyclothymic disorder. See Table 2.8 for the differential diagnostic
          criteria among bipolar disorders.                  
                                                             
                                                             
       Table 2.8 Differential Diagnostic Criteria among Bipolar Disorders
                                                             
       Type     Required Symptom Criteria Minimum Functional Consequences
                                Symptom                      
                                Duration                     
                                      as a Result of Bipolar 
                                      Symptoms               
       Bipolar I Minimum one manic episode 1 week Marked impairment in
                                       social or occupational
                                       functioning,          
                                       or necessitates       
       Bipolar II Minimum one hypomanic                      
                 episode and one major                       
                                4 days                       
                                       hospitalization       
                                      NOT severe enough      
                                       to cause marked       
                 depression            impairment in social or
                                       occupational functioning
                                       or to necessitate     
       Cyclothymic Both hypomanic and                        
                 depressive periods without                  
                                       hospitalization       
                                Two years, with the hypomanic and
                                 depressive periods present at least
                 ever fulfilling the criteria                
                 for an episode of mania,                    
                 hypomania, or major                         
                                 half the time, and the individual
                                 having the symptoms for more than
                                 2 months at a time          
                 depression                                  
       Substance or Medications that can induce manic symptoms are steroids and alpha
         medication interferon. Medications that can induce hypomanic episodes are
         induced antidepressants and electroconvulsive therapy
       Due to medical Among the best-known medical conditions that can cause bipolar
         condition manic or hypomanic episodes are Cushing’s disease, multiple
                 sclerosis, stroke, or traumatic brain injuries

=== Page 63 (1 cols) ===
52 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         Similar to what was discussed in Boxes 2.1 and 2.2, it is essential that APMHNs
         have a working knowledge of the neurobiological basis of bipolar disorder. Box
         2.3 includes neurobiological theories of bipolar disorder, mainly focusing on the
         diagnostic symptom criteria of bipolar disorder and associated brain regions.
                                                             
                                                             
          Box 2.3 Neurobiological Theories of Bipolar Disorder
          In addition to understanding the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for bipolar dis-
          order, it is essential that APMHNs have a working knowledge of its neuro-
          biological basis, especially the role of brain circuits and related symptom
          dimensions, in order to understand how psychotropic medications have
          been used in its treatment. Each diagnostic symptom for a manic or hypo-
          manic episode is believed to be linked to alterations in neurotransmission
          within a certain brain region. Table 2.9 shows each brain region associated
          with a different constellation of symptoms.        
                                                             
          Table 2.9 Diagnostic Symptom Criteria of Bipolar Disorder and Associated Brain
                Regions                                      
          Symptom Criteria of Manic Episode Brain Regions    
          Elevated/expansive or irritable mood Prefrontal cortex (PFC), amyg-
                                    dala (A)                 
          Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity Nucleus accumbens (NA), PFC
          Decreased need for sleep Thalamus (T), hypothalamus (HY)
          More talkative or pressured speech PFC             
          Flight of ideas or racing thoughts NA, PFC         
          Distractible/concentration PFC                     
          Increased goal-directed activity or psychomotor Striatum (T)
            agitation                                        
          Risk-taking behaviors    PFC                       
          Source: Adapted from Stahl (2013).                 
          Generally, the inefficient function in these brain circuits in mania may be
          the opposite of the malfunctioning neuronal circuits in the same key neu-
          rotransmitters (serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine) hypothesized for
          depression. There may also be activation in some overlapping and in some
          different brain regions that are activated in depression. Therefore, treat-
          ments for mania or hypomania either reduce or stabilize monoaminergic
          regulation of brain circuits associated with its symptoms (Stahl, 2013).
                                                             
         Interviewing Techniques in Assessment of Bipolar Disorders
                                                             
         As mentioned earlier, bipolar disorders are marked by severe mood swings
         between depression and hypomania or mania. Especially during the initial

=== Page 64 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 53
       psychiatric interview of a client who presents with a chief complaint of depres-
       sion, the depressed client may be too preoccupied with depressive symptoms to
       bring up a history of manic or hypomanic symptoms if not asked. Therefore, the
       APMHN should always inquire about prior manic or hypomanic symptoms dur-
       ing the initial interview of a depressed person.      
         The following sample questions would be helpful for the APMHN to elicit
       responses about the presence of any symptoms of mania or hypomania, and to
       differentiate between the types of bipolar disorder:  
        1. General question to target overall symptoms of bipolar disorder and its
          duration:                                          
          a. Is there a time in your life when you felt really super energized, did not
            need sleep, talked very fast, and did things like spending too much money
            or giving away valuables?                        
            (This question would validate the DSM-5 symptom categories of bipolar
          disorder: inflated self-esteem or grandiosity, decreased need for sleep, more
          talkative than usual, and excessive involvement in activities that have a high
          potential for painful consequences. Following the response to this question,
          breaking down specific symptom-based short questions would be easier for
          the client to respond.)                            
          b. Have there ever been several days or even weeks when you felt extremely
            energetic?                                       
            (This duration of symptoms would be helpful to differentiate between
          bipolar I disorder, for which symptoms last at least 1 week, and bipolar II
          disorder, for which symptoms last at least 4 days.)
          c. Do you feel scattered, unproductive, and bothered by an unsettling
            sensation of bursts of low-grade energy so that you are just not yourself?
            (This type of question would be helpful to elicit the symptoms of
          hypomania.)                                        
          d. Was there a time that things got so upsetting that you needed to be
            hospitalized?                                    
            (This question is to determine the severity of bipolar symptoms, since the
          hypomanic episode is not severe enough to necessitate hospitalization.)
        2. Specific questions targeted to elicit each sign or symptom of bipolar disorder:
          a. Was there a time in your life when you felt like you were on the top of the
            world and had special powers that other didn’t? (Grandiosity)
          b. At some point in your life, did you experience that you didn’t have to
            sleep for days because you had so much energy? (Decreased need for
            sleep)                                           
          c. Do you recall starting to speak rapidly or did any of your friends remark
            that you are talking too fast? (Hyperverbal)     
          d. Do you find your attention easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant
            things? (Distractibility)                        
          e. Do you find that it’s hard to keep track of your thoughts or do you experi-
            ence racing thoughts? (Flight of ideas)

=== Page 65 (1 cols) ===
54 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
            f. Have you had any brilliant ideas or started several new activities lately?
              (Increased goal-directed activity)             
           g. Have you ever done things that were out of character for you and that
              later you were embarrassed about, like spending too much money or giv-
              ing valuables away? (Indiscretion and recklessness)
             The following is a case exemplar of an initial psychiatric evaluation that
           demonstrates how the diagnosis of bipolar disorder is determined, including
           the rationales and treatment plan for it.         
                                                             
         Case Exemplar                                       
         The client’s initials are BB.                       
                                                             
         A. Identification, Chief Complaint, and Reason for Referral
                                                             
         BB is a 47-year-old Caucasian female who presented with the chief complaint, “I
         just can’t sleep anymore and my primary care doctor sent me to this clinic for a
         psychiatric evaluation.”                            
                                                             
         B. History of Present Illness                       
         BB reported that since her 25-year-old son was diagnosed with brain cancer 9
         months ago, she has been extremely irritable and easily agitated: “Nobody can
         talk to me—I bite their heads off! I don’t want to be around anybody; they all get
         on my nerves. I’ve gotten to the point that I just keep things to myself. I don’t go
         anywhere, and I don’t do anything. My mother tries to get me to come out of my
         room, but I just want to stay in bed and watch TV all day.” BB further elaborated
         that she got fired from her job as a retail sales associate 2 months ago following an
         altercation with her supervisor. Usually, she could deal with the supervisor’s atti-
         tude, but that day she just snapped and threw everything out the window, which
         led to her termination. After that, she was not able to pay her rent and ended up
         moving into her mother’s place last month. Her inability to support herself con-
         tributes to BB’s feelings of worthlessness and social isolation. She feels no desire
         to look for a job and to get her life together. When BB went to see her primary
         care doctor for a routine check-up, she was told to get help from a mental health
         clinic. She agreed to come to the clinic. Initial psychiatric evaluation revealed low
         mood, increased levels of agitation, anhedonia, and difficulty concentrating. She
         reported having thoughts recently of “just not being here,” but denies suicide idea-
         tion/intent/plans. BB also suffers from decreased motivation, low energy, insom-
         nia, feelings of worthlessness, agitation, and irritability.
         C. Past Psychiatric History                         
                                                             
         BB denied a history of psychotic symptoms and psychiatric hospitalization, and
         reported no past history of suicidal attempts. Assessment revealed no history of

=== Page 66 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 55
       manic episodes, but careful inquiry exposed hypomanic episodes, beginning in
       her early 20s, during which BB described herself as unusually productive, crea-
       tive, and sociable, and “able to go all day and night without much sleep.” During
       these episodes, BB reported getting two speeding tickets and going on shop-
       ping sprees, stating that she got into trouble with overdrawn credit cards a few
       times. BB reported intermittent treatment of depressive symptoms since her early
       20s, typically prescribed by her primary care provider, but on occasion by her
       gynecologist. She has either been treated with monotherapy antidepressants or a
       combination of antidepressants and benzodiazepine. She stated that she received
       both of her traffic citations while on fluoxetine therapy. While exploring her past
       history, BB stated that she realized most of her spending sprees occurred during
       antidepressant treatment. Her medication treatment for depression includes trials
       of sertraline, citalopram, venlafaxine XR, and bupropion. BB reported modest
       improvement of depressive mood with these antidepressants, and at times was
       treated with diazepam or lorazepam for her anxiety. BB has also received trazo-
       done for insomnia, which in the past has helped her to sleep better. She stated that
       she has not been compliant with the prescribed medications for longer than 5 or 6
       months because the medications either did not seem to help her depression or she
       felt so good that she believed she was cured. BB last received treatment for her
       mood symptoms 3 years ago.                            
        D. Substance Use History                             
       BB reported a history of using roughly one to two grams of marijuana two to
       three times weekly to help her sleep. Her last marijuana use was last night before
       she went to sleep. She denied drinking alcohol or using other drugs, including
       tobacco.                                              
                                                             
        E. Social and Developmental History                  
                                                             
       BB is currently residing with her mother, who is supportive and available to her,
       especially when she is in “trouble,” referring to her mood swings. However, BB
       has alienated herself from other relatives and friends due to those frequent mood
       swings. She claims that she wants to feel better so that she can accomplish her
       dream of owning her own business.                     
          1. Education: BB dropped out of high school in eleventh grade, and later
            obtained her GED certificate.                    
          2. Family Relationship, Social Network, and Abuse History: BB was born
            in Long Island, New York, and is the older child of two siblings. She
            recalls growing up in a chaotic family, most of whom suffered some
            sort of mental illness and substance use (see the family psychiatric his-
            tory). She was married to an alcoholic man for 5 years and had one son.
            Currently, she resides with her mother after being fired from her job. BB
            is close to the mother, who has been supportive of her throughout her

=== Page 67 (1 cols) ===
56 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
              life. BB claimed that she has been very close to her son and his illness
              was the main reason why she has been “falling apart.” She denied any
              history of trauma, such as exposure to violence or sexual or physical
              abuse during her childhood.                    
           3. Employment Record: BB has had various occupations, mostly in retail
              clothing stores as a retail sales associate, as she was known to be socially
              pleasant and good with customers. However, each employment did not
              last more than a year due to her mood swings and frequent absenteeism.
           4. Legal Records: BB denies any problem with the law and denies any
              criminal records other than traffic tickets.   
          F. Family Psychiatric History                      
                                                             
         BB’s family has a significant mental illness and substance use history:
                                                             
           1. Mental illness:                                
              ·· Maternal grandmother and sister—bipolar disorder.
              ·· Mother—anxiety disorder.                    
              ·· Son—attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and depression.
           2. Substance use:                                 
              ·· Maternal grandmother, both paternal grandparents—tobacco.
              ·· Maternal grandmother, both grandfathers, father, mother, sister, and
                son—alcohol.                                 
              ·· Father, brother, and son—cannabis.          
              ·· Son—methamphetamine.                        
         G. Medical History and Review of System             
                                                             
         BB reported:                                        
                                                             
           1. Current medical conditions and related treatments as following:
              ·· Hypothyroidism, treated with levothyroxine 0.75 mg daily.
              ·· Osteoarthritis, treated with celecoxib 200 mg daily.
              ·· Hypertension, treated with lisinopril 10 mg daily, hydrochlorothi-
                azide 12.5 mg daily.                         
           2. Past medical history:                          
              ·· A total hysterectomy at age 37, secondary to menorrhagia related to
                fibroid tumors.                              
              ·· A tonsillectomy at age 2, secondary to recurrent tonsillitis and ear
                infections.                                  
           3. Allergic to penicillin and quinolones (urticaria with each).
           4. Vital signs: BP: 120/80; HR: 70; RR: 20; Temp: 98 F; Ht: 5’5”; Wt: 125
              lbs; BMI: 21.                                  
           5. Review of systems showed no significant observable overall physical
              abnormalities.

=== Page 68 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 57
        H. Mental Status Examination                         
          1. Appearance and Behavior: BB appears to be the stated age; general
            appearance is well-kept with good personal hygiene; overall behavior is
            cooperative with good eye contact during the interview; speech fluent,
            linear, logical, and coherent.                   
          2. Mood: Anxious, labile varying between sad and angry.
          3. Affect: Irritable, tearful, and withdrawn.      
          4. Thought Content and Process: No evidence of delusions, denied suicidal
            ideations/intent/plans, no abnormality in thought content and thought
            process present.                                 
          5. Perceptional Disturbances: Denied auditory, visual, and tactile
            hallucinations.                                  
          6. Sensorium, Cognitive, and Intellectual Functioning: BB is alert and ori-
            ented × 3. Attention span and concentration are intact, intellectual func-
            tioning is on average level.                     
         I. Diagnosis and Treatment Plan                     
          1. DSM-5 Diagnosis: BB’s diagnosis is recorded as bipolar II disorder,
            moderate, most recent episode of depression, anxious distress (details
            of the descriptions of severity, type of current and recent episodes, and
            specifiers can be found in the DSM-5, pages 149–154).
          2. Rationale for Diagnostic Impression: According to the DSM-5 (APA,
            2013), to diagnose bipolar II disorder, the following criteria must be pre-
            sent, either in the past or currently. BB met these criteria, as indicated by
            the bold symptom categories:                     
        A. At least one hypomanic episode and at least one major depressive episode
          must be present either in the past or currently. Below is a description of
          BB’s symptom manifestations, which meet Criteria 1 and 2:
          1. At least one hypomanic episode. BB experienced a hypomanic episode
            in the past, with increased energy/activities presenting most of the day,
            nearly every day, lasting at least 4 consecutive days, as evidenced by
            three self-reported symptoms of:                 
             a. Increased goal-directed activity or energy evidenced by BB’s self-
               report of “unusually productive, creative, sociable.”
            b. Decreased need for sleep evidenced by BB’s self-report of “able to
               go all day and night on 3 hours sleep.”       
             c. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for
               painful consequences evidenced by BB’s self-report of “enjoys
               shopping and has gotten into trouble with credit cards a few times.”
          2. At least one major depressive episode. BB reported a major depressive
            episode in the past and present, with seven symptoms (see the quota-
            tion next to each depressive symptom criterion) from the DSM-5’s major
            depressive symptom criteria present during the same 2-week period
            (requires a minimum of five symptoms), and representing a change from
            previous functioning:

=== Page 69 (1 cols) ===
58 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
              a. Depressed mood most of the day. “low mood.” 
              b. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all,
                activities most of the day. “I’ve gotten to where I just keep to myself.
                I don’t go anywhere, and I don’t do anything.”
              c. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt.
                “feelings of worthlessness and social isolation.”
              d. Psychomotor agitation. “increased levels of anxiety, agitation, and
                irritability.”                               
              e. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness. “dif-
                ficulty concentrating.”                      
              f. Fatigue or loss of energy. “low energy.”    
              g. Sleep disturbance. “insomnia.”              
         B. There has never been a manic episode. BB reported that she never had a
           manic episode in her life.                        
         C. The symptoms of depression or the unpredictability caused by frequent
           alternation between periods of depression and hypomania causes signifi-
           cant distress or impairment in social and/or occupational functioning. BB
           reported her inability to keep a job, financial constraints, social isolation, and
           poor interpersonal relationships.                 
           3. Summary and Treatment Plan: In this section, a brief summary is added
              for the APMHN to elaborate when diagnosing clients presenting with a
              common disorder:                               
              ·· Summary: BB suffers from bipolar disorder II, which started in her
                20s, subjectively experienced as “mood swings,” but was misdiag-
                nosed as depression since BB only reported depressed mood to her
                healthcare providers. Approximately 60% of patients with bipolar
                disorder who present with depressive symptoms are misdiagnosed
                as having recurrent depression (Phillips & Kupfer, 2013), which
                can lead to inappropriate treatments, with worsening of symptoms.
                Unfortunately, BB was treated with antidepressants by nonpsy-
                chiatric specialists, which might have precipitated antidepressant-
                induced hypomanic or manic episodes. Ultimately, unchecked
                hypomanic symptoms led to risky behaviors, through which BB
                sustained severe damage to relationships, careers, and finances.
              ·· Treatment plan: Explain to the client and the family the appropriate
                treatment plan, including the accurate diagnosis following psychiat-
                ric evaluation by the APMHN, adequate treatment options based on
                the evidence, and the client treatment-related preferences:
                ·· Level of care: Outpatient clinic. Currently, BB presents no
                   imminent danger to self or others, but is willing to accept the
                   recommended treatment in the outpatient mental health clinic.
                ·· Screening for bipolar disorder: A rigorous screening for a cli-
                   ent who presents a potential diagnosis of bipolar disorder with
                   validated screening instruments (e.g., mood disorder question-
                   naire, bipolar spectrum diagnostic scale, rapid mood screener).

=== Page 70 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 59
               ·· Psychopharmacological treatment: Guidelines for pharmaco-
                 therapy for bipolar depression have been developed through
                 a collaboration between the Canadian Network for Mood and
                 Anxiety Treatments and the International Society for Bipolar
                 Disorders (Yatham et al., 2018). Since BB is diagnosed with
                 “bipolar II disorder, moderate, most recent episode of depres-
                 sion, anxious distress,” medication options based on the evi-
                 dence, using the guidelines and BB’s medication-related
                 preferences, could be explored and a decision made as to appro-
                 priate psychopharmacological treatment.     
                                                             
       Section 4: Anxiety Disorders                          
                                                             
       Anxiety disorders are classified in the DSM-5 as 11 distinct diagnostic disor-
       ders. They can be viewed as a group of related mental disorders that share fea-
       tures of excessive fear and anxiety, as well as related behavioral disturbances.
       Anxiety disorders make up the most common group of psychiatric disorders,
       with a 12-month prevalence rate of approximately 17% in the United States.
       Phobia is the most common disorder, with a lifetime prevalence of 10% and an
       average age onset of late 20s, followed by generalized anxiety disorder, with a
       lifetime prevalence of 3–8% and an average onset of early adulthood (Sadock
       et al., 2019).                                        
         However, most anxiety disorders develop in childhood, and tend to persist if
       not treated. As with depressive disorders, women are twice as likely as men to be
       affected (APA, 2013). Signs and symptoms manifest both psychologically and
       physically. Psychological symptoms are feelings of dread, hypervigilance, and
       difficulty concentrating, while physical symptoms involve a hyperactive auto-
       nomic nervous system, which manifests as tachycardia, sweating, dry mouth,
       flushing, and other somatic complaints, such as shortness of breath (SOB) and
       trembling (Sadock et al., 2019). Due to the nature of this disorder’s common
       concurrent symptom manifestations, it is especially important that the APMHN
       understands and respects the client’s perspective and experience, and that they
       rule out other potential medical illnesses, to make a proper diagnosis and treat-
       ment plan. Conducting a psychiatric evaluation of a client presenting with symp-
       toms of anxiety disorder requires a skillful diagnostic interview to obtain accurate
       information while building a rapport and therapeutic alliance with the client. The
       goal of this approach is to improve client engagement, client knowledge of diag-
       nosis and treatment options, and collaborative decision-making with the APMHN
       about treatment.                                      
         Table 2.10 lists the specific anxiety disorders in the DSM-5, differentiated by
       type, followed by brief descriptions.                 
         In addition to understanding the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for anxiety disor-
       ders, it is essential that APMHNs have a working knowledge of their neurobio-
       logical basis, especially the role of brain circuits and related symptom dimensions,

=== Page 71 (1 cols) ===
60 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         Table 2.10 Anxiety Disorder Diagnostic Classification
                                                             
         Diagnosis                                           
         Classification                                      
                     Specific Diagnosis Type of Objects or Situation,
                                      and/or Essential Feature of
                                      Each Anxiety Disorder  
         Specific phobia Acrophobia                          
                     Agoraphobia                             
                     Ailurophobia                            
                     Claustrophobia                          
                     Cynophobia                              
                     Hydrophobia                             
                     Mysophobia                              
                     Pyrophobia                              
                     Xenophobia                              
                     Zoophobia                               
                                      Fear of heights        
                                      Fear of open places    
                                      Fear of cats           
                                      Fear of closed spaces  
                                      Fear of dogs           
                                      Fear of water          
                                      Fear of dirt and germs 
                                      Fear of fire           
                                      Fear of strangers      
                                      Fear of animals        
         DSM-5 Classification of Anxiety Disorders           
         Agoraphobia Intense fear or anxiety triggered by the real or anticipated
                      exposure to a wide range of situations (e.g., using public
                      transportation, being in open spaces, enclosed places, in
                      crowds, or outside of the home alone); symptom severity is
                      a strong determinant of disability; more than one-third of
                      agoraphobic clients are completely homebound and unable
                      to work                                
         Social anxiety Irrational fear of public situations (e.g., speaking in public,
          disorder    eating in public, using public bathrooms)
         Panic disorder Characterized by spontaneous panic attacks, which may evolve
                      in stages: subclinical attacks, full panic attacks, anticipatory
                      anxiety, or phobic avoidance of specific situations; this
                      disorder may occur alone or be associated with agoraphobia
         Generalized anxiety Involves excessive worry about everyday life circumstances,
          disorder    events, or conflicts; symptoms may fluctuate and overlap with
                      other medical and psychiatric disorders, such as depressive
                      and other anxiety disorders            
         Substance-/ A wide range of substances can cause anxiety symptoms that are
          medication-induced often associated with intoxication or withdrawal states
          anxiety disorder                                   
         Anxiety disorder due A wide range of medical conditions can cause anxiety
          to another medical symptoms; also, a number of medical conditions are known
          condition   to include anxiety as a symptomatic manifestation, such as
                      hyperthyroidism, hypoglycemia, angina pectoris/myocardial
                      infarction, asthma, vitamin B12 deficiency, and neoplasms
         Anxiety disorders that differ from developmental disorders
         Selective mutism Inability to speak in certain social situations despite the ability to
                      speak in other circumstances           
         Separational anxiety Developmentally inappropriate and excessive fear and anxiety
          disorder    over separation from home or loved ones
         Source: Adapted from Sadock et al. (2019).

=== Page 72 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 61
       in order to understand how psychotropic medications have been used in treatment.
       Box 2.4 summarizes the neurobiological theories of anxiety disorders.
                                                             
                                                             
         Box 2.4 Neurobiological Theories of Anxiety Disorders
                                                             
         Although there are different diagnostic criteria for different anxiety dis-
         orders, they all have overlapping symptoms of anxiety and fear, coupled
         with worry. Hypothetically, anxiety and fear symptoms are regulated by
         an amygdala-centered circuit, while worry is regulated by a cortico-striato-
         thalamo-cortical (CTSC) circuit. However, what differentiates one anxiety
         disorder from another may not be the anatomical localization or the neuro-
         transmitters regulating fear and worry, but the specific nature of the mal-
         functioning within the same circuits.               
         Table 2.11 Anxiety Disorder–Associated Symptoms Malfunctioning in Brain
               Regions and Circuits                          
         Core symptom of anxiety: Fear Overactivation of amygdala circuit reciprocal
                           or activating connection with     
         Panic and phobia  • Anterior cingulate cortex/-orbitofrontal
                            cortex                           
         Avoidance; motor response • Periaqueductal gray     
         Endocrine output of fear; • Hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis
          increased cortisol release                         
         Breathing output; shortness of • Parabrachial nucleus (PBN)
          breath                                             
         Autonomic output of fear; • Locus coeruleus         
          increased heart beat and blood                     
          pressure                                           
         Re-experiencing; feature of PTSD • Hippocampus (storage of traumatic
                            memories)                        
         Linking “fear” to amygdala cir- • Malfunctioning of amygdala-centered
          cuits to neurotransmitters and circuits which are regulated by neuro-
          voltage-gated iron channels transmitters (serotonin, GABA, glutamate,
                            norepinephrine) and voltage-gated iron
                            channels                         
         Core symptom of anxiety: Worry Malfunction of CTSC circuit
         Worry; anxious misery, apprehen- • Overactivation of the CTSC circuit ending
          sive expectations, catastrophic in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
          thinking, ruminations, and                         
          obsessions                                         
         Linking “worry” to CTSC circuits • Malfunctioning of CTSC circuits which are
          to neurotransmitters and regulated by neurotransmitters (serotonin,
          voltage-gated iron channels dopamine, GABA, glutamate, norepineph-
                            rine) and voltage-gated iron channels
         Source: Adapted from Stahl (2013).

=== Page 73 (1 cols) ===
62 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                                                             
            For example, in generalized anxiety disorder, malfunctioning in the
          amygdala and cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical circuits is persistent and
          unremitting, yet not severe, while in panic disorder, the same malfunction-
          ing is intermittent but catastrophic in an unexpected manner, and in social
          anxiety disorder it is intermittent but catastrophic in an expected manner. In
          post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), circuit malfunctioning may be both
          traumatic in origin and conditioned (Stahl, 2013). For APMHNs to treat
          their clients with anxiety disorders, it is essential that they understand how
          the GABA, other neurotransmitters, and iron channels regulate brain cir-
          cuits. Table 2.11 presents malfunctioning in brain regions and circuits for
          different symptoms of anxiety disorders.           
                                                             
         Furthermore, as a wide range of medical conditions either cause anxiety symp-
         toms or include anxiety as one of several symptoms, when an APMHN evaluates
         a client with a probable anxiety disorder, it is useful to rule out a potential medical
         etiology of anxiety during the diagnostic evaluation (Table 2.12).
                                                             
                                                             
         Table 2.12 Differential Diagnosis of Common Medical Conditions Mimicking
               Anxiety                                       
         Common Medical Common Symptoms Rule Out with Test/Intervention
         Conditions                                          
         Angina pectoris/                                    
          myocardial                                         
          infarction (MI)                                    
         Hyperventilation                                    
          syndrome                                           
         Hypoglycemia                                        
                                                             
         Hyperthyroidism                                     
                  Crushing chest pain, usually               
                    associated with angina/MI                
                  Rapid and deep respirations,               
                    circumoral pallor,                       
                    carpopedal spasm                         
                  Signs of diabetes mellitus;                
                    polyuria, polydipsia,                    
                    polyphagia                               
                  Anxiety, restlessness, and                 
                    irritability                             
                                  Electrocardiogram with ST  
                                   depression in angina; cardiac
                                   enzymes in MI             
                                  Respond to rebreathing in paper
                                   bag                       
                                  Fasting blood sugar usually
                                   under 50 mg/dL            
                                  Thyroid function tests;    
                                   decreased thyroid stimulating
                                   hormone (TSH), but elevated
                                   triiodothyronine (T3),    
                                   thyroxine (T4)            
         Source: Adapted from Sadock et al. (2019).          
          In this section, generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is selected as an exam-
         ple of a presenting anxiety disorder, as it represents the classic condition in this
         group of disorders. GAD is known to be associated with significant disability and
         distress, and most noninstitutionalized adults with the disorder are moderately to
         seriously disabled (APA, 2013).

=== Page 74 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 63
       Diagnostic Criteria                                   
       DSM-5 GAD Diagnostic Criteria Modified                
                                                             
        A. Signs and Symptoms: Excessive anxiety and worry about a number of
          events or activities, such as work or school performance. The anxiety and
          worry are associated with three (or more) of the following six symptoms:
          1. Restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge.    
          2. Being easily fatigued.                          
          3. Difficulty concentrating or mind going blank.   
          4. Irritability.                                   
          5. Muscle tension.                                 
          6. Sleep disturbance.                              
        B. Duration: Symptoms occurring more days than not for at least 6 months.
        C. Impairment in Function: The symptoms cause clinically significant distress
          or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
        D. Differential Diagnosis:                           
          1. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a sub-
            stance (e.g., drug use, adverse reaction of medication) or other medical
            condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism, hypoglycemia). 
          2. The disturbance is not better explained by other mental disorders.
          3. Symptoms of autonomic hyperarousal (e.g., accelerated heart rate, short-
            ness of breath, dizziness) are less prominent in GAD than in other anxi-
            ety disorders.                                   
       Interviewing Techniques in Assessment of GAD          
       The following questions are examples for the APMHN to consider when evaluat-
       ing a client’s presenting symptoms to formulate a final diagnosis, based on the
       DSM-5 symptom criteria of GAD:                        
                                                             
        1. Would you describe yourself as a chronic worrier or do you hear from oth-
          ers that you are always worrying about things? (DSM-5 symptom criteria:
          “Excessive anxiety and worry about a number of events or activities, such as
          work or school performance”).                      
        2. If you do, how often and how long has this been going on? (DSM-5 symptom
          criteria: “Symptoms occurring more days than not for at least 6 months”).
        3. Over the past few months of worrying, have you noticed that you have been
          jittery, on edge, or irritable? (DSM-5 symptom criteria: “Restlessness or
          feeling keyed up or on edge,” “Irritability”).     
        4. Do you often experience tension in your head and neck or any other parts of
          your body? (DSM-5 symptom criteria: “Muscle tension”).
        5. What has your sleep been like? (DSM-5 symptom criteria: “Sleep disturbance”).

=== Page 75 (1 cols) ===
64 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
          6. Do you experience difficulty in concentrating on tasks because your mind
           often goes blank? (DSM-5 symptom criteria: “Difficulty concentrating or
           mind going blank”).                               
          7. Do you find yourself being tired easily? (DSM-5 symptom criteria: “Being
           easily fatigued”).                                
          8. Some people are worriers but they can usually handle it. Other people are
           such severe worriers that they find that worrying gets in the way of their life
           or paralyzes them. Which one sounds more like you? (DSM-5 symptom cri-
           teria: “The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
           social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning”).
          9. How would you describe what your typical day is like? (Asking about the
           client’s typical day can open up a cache of diagnostically rich data that may
           help the APMHN to grasp an overall picture of the client’s life).
         The following is a case exemplar of an initial psychiatric evaluation, including how
         the diagnosis of GAD is determined, with a proposed treatment plan and rationales.
                                                             
         Case Exemplar                                       
                                                             
         The client’s initials are Ms. M.                    
         A. Identification, Chief Complaint, and Reason for Referral
                                                             
         Ms. M is a 49-year-old Caucasian female who works as an account executive and
         was referred to the outpatient clinic by her primary care provider for psychiatric
         evaluation and treatment. Her chief complaint is, “I’ve dealt with anxiety most of
         my life, but lately it has taken control of my life.”
                                                             
         B. History of the Present Illness                   
                                                             
         Ms. M reported that over the past 7 months following her promotion to supervisor
         at her job, she has noticed that every little thing is causing her to be overly anxious.
         Her wife has also noticed this change in her behavior and has been doing her best
         to take on extra responsibilities in the home to give Ms. M a break. Ms. M has been
         dealing with considerable amounts of anxiety and worry almost every day. She
         complained that her mind was consumed by constant worrying, ruminating about
         things she felt she might have forgotten to do throughout the day, unable to focus,
         with poor concentration at work. Recently, she has found that many of her work
         projects have become overwhelming and are causing her excessive stress, and that
         she has had trouble completing them on time. In addition, she complained of waves
         of nervousness and trembling, with a mild degree of shortness of breath and heart
         palpitations. She also reported having sleep problems, usually tossing and turning
         for 30–90 minutes before falling asleep. Not getting adequate sleep, Ms. M reported
         restlessness and fatigue throughout the day. Ms. M is now concerned that she has
         been constantly irritable around her wife, which has been affecting her marriage.

=== Page 76 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 65
        C. Past Psychiatric History                          
                                                             
       Ms. M reports no past history of psychiatric treatments, either outpatient or inpa-
       tient in a hospital setting, and no prior diagnosed psychiatric symptoms before the
       onset of the current episode. However, she admitted that she has always been a
       worrier and others, like her wife and close friends, have told her that she worries
       about everything all the time.                        
        D. Substance Use History                             
                                                             
       Ms. M denies any use of alcohol, cocaine, opiates, amphetamines, marijuana,
       nicotine, or any other illicit drugs.                 
        E. Social and Developmental History                  
                                                             
          1. Education: Completion of MBA program with honors.
          2. Family Relationship, Social Network, and Abuse History: Lives with
            wife and two teenage children (14-year-old girl and 16-year-old boy).
            Has not maintained relationships with friends due to her excessive anxi-
            ety since promotion to supervisor at her current job. No history of abuse.
          3. Legal Records: Ms. M has no history of arrest or any pending legal
            case.                                            
          4. Religious Background: Christian.                
        F. Family History                                    
          Ms. M claimed that there was no history of psychiatric illness among family
          and relatives.                                     
                                                             
        G. Medical History and Review of Systems: The APMHN conducted a full
          physical examination.                              
                                                             
          1. Vital signs: B/P: 110/70; HR: 98; R/R: 18; Temp: 98.6 F; Ht: 5’4”; Wt:
            119 lbs.                                         
          2. General: No acute distress (NAD), alert, awake, and oriented × 4 (AAO
            × 4) to name, place, time, purpose, well-developed and well-nourished
            (WDWN) white female.                             
          3. Head, eyes, ears, nose, throat (HEENT): Normocephalic atraumatic
            (NCAT), mucous membranes moist (MMM), extraocular muscles intact
            (EOMI), pupils equally round and reactive to light and accommodation
            bilaterally (PERRLA), bilateral tympanic membrane (b/l TM) intact and
            reactive to light, bilateral sclera anicteric, no conjunctival injection.
          4. Cardiovascular (CV): Regular rate and rhythm (RRR), S1S2 normal, no
            chest pain, but reported occasional palpitations during anxiety episodes.
          5. Pulmonary: Clear to auscultation bilaterally (CTAB), no rales/rhonchi/
            wheezes (R/R/W), no egophany, no tactice fremitus, normal percussion,
            mild degree of shortness of breath during anxiety episodes.

=== Page 77 (1 cols) ===
66 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
           6. Gastrointestinal (GI): Normal bowel sound (BS) throughout four quad-
              rants, non-distended, non-tender, no nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea.
           7. Genitourinary (GU): No gynecological or urological issues reported.
           8. Skin: Intact, no rashes, erythema, or lesions. 
           9. Neurologic: Cranial nerves II to XII intact.   
           10. Musculoskeletal: Normal range of motion (ROM), no complaint of joint
              pain, stiffness, or swelling, and normal gait. 
           11. Allergies: No known allergies reported.       
         H. Mental Status Examination                        
                                                             
           1. Appearance and Behavior: The client was a casually dressed, 49-year-
              old Caucasian woman, who appeared to be the stated age. She was
              cooperative, made good eye contact with the interviewer throughout the
              entire interview, but irritable, with frequent handwringing and shifting of
              her legs.                                      
           2. Mood: Anxious.                                 
           3. Affect: Irritable, mildly tense, and mood congruent.
           4. Thought Content and Process: Speech was fluent, with normal tone and
              volume, linear and goal directed, and coherent. Thought contents indicated
              no evidence of loose associations, tangential thought, thought blocking,
              or other signs of a formal thought disorder, including delusions or ideas
              of reference. Denied suicidal or homicidal ideations/intents/plans.
           5. Perceptual Disturbances: Denied any forms of perceptual disturbances,
              including auditory, visual, or tactile hallucinations.
           6. Sensorium, Cognitive, and Intellectual Functioning: Alert and oriented × 4.
              There was no evidence of gross cognitive dysfunction at any point during
              the interview. She acknowledged poor concentration and difficulty focus-
              ing on her daily tasks due to her anxiety, and is motivated for treatment.
          I. Diagnostic Screens and Laboratory Tests         
           In this section, an example that demonstrates evidence-based practice is
           added as a result of the final diagnostic screening:
           1. Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item (GAD-7) scale was used to assess
              the severity of Ms. M’s anxiety symptoms. This tool assists in supporting
              a diagnosis of GAD. Ms. M scored a 12; a score above 10 is indicative of
              moderate anxiety and warrants further assessment (Spitzer et al., 2006).
           2. The following laboratory tests were ordered to rule out common medical
              conditions mimicking anxiety: complete blood count (CBC) w/differen-
              tial; basic metabolic panel (BMP); liver function test (LFT); urine tox;
              hormone panel: thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), T3, T4, estradiol,
              follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH) to assess
              kidney and liver functioning, as well as to rule out any organic cause
              for the symptoms of anxiety, such as thyroid dysfunction/menopause or
              illicit drug use (McCance & Huether, 2018).

=== Page 78 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 67
        J. Diagnosis and Treatment Plan                      
                                                             
          1. DSM-5 Diagnosis: GAD, moderate.                 
          2. Rationale for Diagnostic Impression: According to the DSM-5 (APA,
            2013), the following criteria must be present in order to diagnose GAD.
            Ms. M meets those criteria, as indicated by the bold symptom categories
            A–E:                                             
        A. Excessive anxiety and worry (apprehensive expectation), occurring more
          days than not for at least 6 months. Ms. M has reported that over the past
          7 months, she has noticed that every little thing is causing her to be overly
          anxious and that she has been dealing with considerable amounts of anxiety
          and worry almost every day.                        
        B. The individual finds it difficult to control the worry. Ms. M’s chief com-
          plaint at the time of evaluation was, “I’ve dealt with anxiety most of my life
          but lately it has taken control of my life.”       
        C. The anxiety and worry are associated with three or more of the following
          symptoms:                                          
          1. Restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge: Ms. M complained of
            waves of nervousness and trembling, with shortness of breath and heart
            palpitations.                                    
          2. Being easily fatigued: Ms. M complained of feeling tired easily.
          3. Difficulty concentrating or mind going blank: She complained that her
            mind was consumed by constant worrying, ruminating about things she
            felt she might have forgotten to do throughout the day, unable to focus,
            with poor concentration at work.                 
          4. Irritability: She reported that she frequently became restless and irritable.
          5. Muscle tension: She did not complain of muscle tension.
          6. Sleep disturbance: She reported having sleep problems, usually tossing
            and turning for 30–90 minutes before falling asleep. Not getting ade-
            quate sleep.                                     
        D. Social, occupational, functional impairment. Recently, she has found that
          many of her work projects have become overwhelming and cause her exces-
          sive stress, and that she has had trouble completing them on time. Ms. M is
          also concerned that she has been constantly irritable around her wife, which
          has been affecting her marriage.                   
        E. Differential diagnosis: Substance/medication induced or related to medical
          conditions. Ms. M denied substance use and reported no obvious common
          medical conditions mimicking anxiety.              
            The APMHN concluded that Ms. M met the DSM-5 GAD diagnostic cri-
          teria as shown by the above descriptions of the symptom presentations.
        3. Treatment Plan: Explain to Ms. M the proposed treatment plan, including
          the diagnosis and treatment options, and ask about her treatment-related
          preferences:

=== Page 79 (1 cols) ===
68 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
           ·· Psychotherapy (e.g., cognitive behavioral therapy [CBT], mindfulness-
              based stress reduction).                       
           ·· Psychopharmacology (e.g., selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor [SSRI],
              selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor [SNRI], benzodiazepine).
         The following document is an example of a client’s psychiatric evaluation, includ-
         ing a treatment plan prepared to send to the referring clinician, as sometimes
         the referring clinician requests the narrative summary rather than the formal
         psychiatric evaluation.                             
          Ms. M is a 49-year-old Caucasian female who works as an account executive
         who you referred to the outpatient clinic for psychiatric evaluation and treatment.
         The patient described her anxiety as being out of control, impairing her function-
         ing at work and home, causing her irritability, fatigue, and insomnia. Moreover,
         she mentioned palpitations and shortness of breath on occasion during episodes
         of intense anxiety. Ms. M was also concerned that her anxiety is interfering with
         her marriage. She has no prior psychiatric treatment history regarding herself or
         her immediate family members. In addition, Ms. M denies any use of illicit drugs,
         herbal supplements, tobacco products, or caffeine. She reported no prior psychi-
         atric treatment and currently indicated no imminent danger to herself or others.
          A comprehensive psychiatric evaluation concluded, based on the patient’s
         symptomology, that she met the diagnostic criteria for generalized anxiety disor-
         der, moderate, based on the Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item scale. Goals and
         interventions were discussed and Ms. M verbalized understanding. A consult for
         psychotherapy, such as cognitive behavioral therapy or mindfulness-based stress
         reduction, will assist Ms. M in managing and becoming aware of triggers for her
         anxiety. Ms. M will be started on 37.5 mg venlafaxine XR, which is a selective
         norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, once daily for 7 days, and will then increase
         to 75 mg daily. Until symptoms improve, can increase dosage by 75 mg every 3
         to 4 weeks, not to exceed 225 mg/day for the treatment of GAD. As Ms. M does
         not have a history of illicit drug use, lorazepam 0.25 mg three times daily will be
         prescribed, with the last dose before bedtime. No prior illicit drug use indicates a
         lower possibility of Ms. M developing habituation of benzodiazepines. However,
         lorazepam will be discontinued within 6 weeks to prevent her from developing
         physiological dependence, pending evaluation at the time. Efficacy of the medica-
         tions taking at least 2–4 weeks to work and of tolerability, including side effects
         of venlafaxine XR, were discussed, as well as potential dependency on benzodi-
         azepine use. If venlafaxine XR is not well tolerated, will consider selective sero-
         tonin reuptake inhibitor such as paroxetine, which has been shown to be effective
         in treating GAD. Ms. M verbalized understanding and is in agreement with the
         treatment plan. She is scheduled for re-evaluation in 2 weeks.
         Section 5: Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
         Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by the presence of (1)
         obsessions, which are recurrent, persistent, and intrusive thoughts, urges, or

=== Page 80 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 69
       images; and (2) compulsions, which are repetitive behaviors or mental acts that
       an individual feels driven to perform in response to an obsession or according
       to rules that must be applied rigidly. A person with OCD may have an obses-
       sion, a compulsion, or both (APA, 2013). There are a variety of OCD-related
       disorders, such as body dysmorphic disorder, hoarding disorder, trichotillomania
       (hair pulling), and excoriation disorder (skin picking). OCD is the fourth most
       common psychiatric disorder, and the lifetime prevalence of OCD in the general
       US population is estimated at 1–3%. The mean age of onset is approximately 20
       years, and among adults, women are affected at a slightly higher rate than are men.
       Approximately 50–70% of clients with OCD have a sudden onset of symptoms
       following a stressful event, such as the death of a loved one, a serious illness, or
       a sexual problem (Sadock et al., 2019). Many OCD clients have full insight that
       their behaviors are senseless and excessive.          
         Table 2.13 presents the variety of obsessions and their related compulsions.
          In this section, obsessive-compulsive disorder is selected as an example of
       a presenting OCD-related disorder, as it represents the classic condition in this
       group of disorders.                                   
                                                             
       Table 2.13 Symptom Patterns of Obsessions and Compulsions
                                                             
       Patterns of Obsession Related Compulsions Comments    
       Contamination (e.g., germs)                           
                                                             
       Pathologic doubt (e.g., door                          
         lock)                                               
       Intrusive thoughts (e.g.,                             
         suicidal, aggressive, sexual,                       
         religious thoughts)                                 
                                                             
       Symmetry (e.g., precision)                            
                                                             
       Preoccupation with perceived                          
         defects or flaws in physical                        
         appearance                                          
       Persistent difficulty discarding                      
         or parting with possessions,                        
         regardless of their value                           
       Recurrent urge of pulling out                         
         one’s hair, resulting in hair                       
         loss                                                
       Recurrent urge of picking skin,                       
         resulting in skin lesions                           
                       Washing, cleaning, and/               
                         or avoiding presumably              
                         contaminated objects                
                       Repetitive checking                   
                       Intrusive thoughts                    
                         may or may not be                   
                         accompanied by                      
                         compulsive behaviors                
                       Repeating words silently,             
                         ordering, counting                  
                       Mirror checking, excessive            
                         grooming, seeking                   
                         reassurance in response             
                         to physical appearance              
                       Hoarding                              
                       Hair pulling                          
                       Skin picking                          
                                      The most common        
                                       pattern of OCD        
                                      The second most        
                                       common pattern of     
                                       OCD                   
                                      The third most common  
                                       pattern of OCD; risk  
                                       of potential harm to  
                                       self or others should 
                                       be evaluated carefully
                                      The fourth most common 
                                       pattern of OCD        
                                      DSM-5 diagnosis: Body  
                                       dysmorphic disorder   
                                      DSM-5 diagnosis:       
                                       Hoarding disorder     
                                      DSM-5 diagnosis:       
                                       Trichotillomania      
                                      DSM-5 diagnosis:       
                                       Excoriation disorder  
       Source: Partially adapted from Sadock et al. (2019).

=== Page 81 (1 cols) ===
70 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         Diagnostic Criteria                                 
         DSM-5 OCD Diagnostic Criteria Modified              
                                                             
         Obsessions are defined by Criteria 1 and 2:         
          1. Recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced at
           some time during the disturbance as intrusive and unwanted, and that in most
           individuals cause marked anxiety or distress.     
          2. The individual attempts to ignore or suppress such thoughts, urges, or images,
           or to neutralize them with some other thought or action (i.e., by performing a
           compulsion).                                      
                                                             
         Compulsions are defined by Criteria 1 and 2:        
          1. Repetitive behaviors (e.g., hand washing, ordering, checking) or mental acts
           (e.g., praying, counting, repeating words silently) that the individual feels
           driven to perform in response to an obsession or according to rules that must
           be applied rigidly.                               
          2. The behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing anxiety or
           distress, or preventing some dreaded event or situation; however, they are
           not connected in a realistic way with what they are designed to neutralize or
           prevent, or are clearly excessive.                
         A. Signs and Symptoms: Presence of obsessions, compulsions, or both.
         B. Duration: The obsessions or compulsions are time-consuming (e.g., taking
           more than 1 hour a day).                          
         C. Impairment in Function: The symptoms cause clinically significant distress
           or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
         D. Differential Diagnosis:                          
           1. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a sub-
              stance (e.g., drug use, adverse reaction of medication) or other medical
              condition (e.g., Sydenham’s chorea, Huntington’s disease).
           2. The disturbance is not better explained by other mental disorders (e.g.,
              obsessive-compulsive personality disorder).    
           3. The disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of GAD or
              other OCD-related disorders, eating disorders (EDs), substance use dis-
              orders (SUDs), or behavioral addictions (e.g., gambling).
         In addition to reviewing the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria for OCD, Box 2.5 sum-
         marizes the neurobiological theories of OCD.        
                                                             
          Box 2.5 Neurobiological Theories of                
          Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder                      
          Neurobiological studies of OCD have found a close correlation between
          clinical symptoms, cognitive function, and brain function. A large number of

=== Page 82 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 71
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                  Executive                                  
                  function                                   
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                          Conflict anxiety                   
                                                             
                                                             
                         Decision-making                     
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                  Basal                                      
                  ganglia           Thalamus                 
                                   Occipital cortex          
                                    cerebellum               
                  DLPFC                                      
                            ACC                              
                            OFC                              
                            OCD                              
                            loop                             
                                    Visuospatial             
                                    information              
          Figure 2.2 Neurobiological model of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Note: This
               figure describes the functional neuroanatomy of the brain in obsessive-
               compulsive disorder (OCD) and the correlation between brain activation
               and clinical improvement. A network including the dorsolateral
               prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and
               posterior regions may be related to cognitive processes in OCD, while
               orbitofronto-striatal regions (OCD-loop) may be involved with OCD
               symptomatology. Clinical improvement of OCD might accompany
               functional improvement of brain and cognitive improvement, such
               as visuospatial information, decision-making, working memory, and
               executive function. OFC, orbitofrontal cortex. Source: Adapted from
               Nakao et al. (2014).

=== Page 83 (1 cols) ===
72 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
          (Nakao et al., 2014) (Figure 2.2).                 
            Additionally, numerous clinical drug trials support the hypothesis that
          dysregulation of serotonin is involved in the symptom formation of obses-
          sions and compulsions. Therefore, very high doses of selective serotonin
          reuptake inhibitors are often considered as first-line treatment of OCD
          (Stahl, 2013).                                     
          previous neuroimaging studies using positron emission tomography (PET),
          single-photon emission computed tomography (CT), or functional magnetic
          resonance imaging (fMRI) have identified abnormally high activities through-
          out the frontal cortex and subcortical structures in patients with OCD. And
          the orbitofrontal-striatal model has been postulated as an abnormal neural
          circuit that mediates symptomatic expression of OCD (Nakao et al., 2014).
            The OCD-loop model regarding the pathophysiology of OCD, proposed
          by Saxena et al. (1998), is centered on the cortico-striatal-thalamic-cortical
          circuits. The model is based on the existence of a lateral orbitofrontal loop
          involving projections from the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) to the head of the
          caudate nucleus and ventral striatum, then to the mediodorsal thalamus via
          the internal pallidus, and finally returning from the thalamus to the OFC.
          The model proposes that OCD is mediated by an imbalance between the
          direct (excitatory, OFC striatum-globus pallidus-thalamus-cortical) and
          indirect (inhibitory, DLPFC-striatum-globus pallidus subthalamic nucleus-
          cortical) pathways within this circuit, which causes brain lock in the cau-
          date nucleus and a mutual hyperactivation between the OFC and thalamus
         Interviewing Techniques in Assessment of            
         Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder                       
         The following are sample diagnostic interview questions aimed to help elicit
         symptoms of OCD. While they are specific to the case exemplar that follows,
         they reflect the kinds of questions for APMHNs to consider during the initial psy-
         chiatric evaluation of clients, with the goal of determining whether a diagnosis of
         OCD based on DSM-5 symptom criteria is accurate.    
          The initial impression leading to the potential OCD diagnosis was based on the
         client’s chief complaint of, “I am always worried about contracting diseases such
         as HIV.” The APMHN noted a strong disinfectant smell from the client, which
         led to asking the client if he had any special cleaning linked to his concern about
         getting HIV. The client responded, “I have avoided touching almost anything
         outside of my home.” This brief interaction helped the APMHN to formulate the
         diagnosis based on the DSM-5 symptom criteria of OCD.
         ·· Client’s chief complaint: “I am always worried about contracting diseases
           such as HIV.” (The client had a strong disinfectant smell.)

=== Page 84 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 73
       ·· APMHN: “I noticed a smell of disinfectant; do you use any specific cleaning
          solution because of your concern about getting HIV?”
                                                             
       (The APMHN attempted to validate their own experience of disinfectant smell and
       to explore the client’s symptom manifestations to narrow diagnosis to a specific
       mental disorder.)                                     
                                                             
       ·· Client: “I have avoided touching almost anything outside of my home, but
          at times I have to use alcohol or Clorox sprays to sterilize things before and
          after I touch the surfaces of objects.”            
            (This response assists the APMHN to move toward the diagnosis of OCD,
          and further explore DSM-5 symptom criteria of it—presence of both obses-
          sions and compulsions. The client met the above Definition 1 of obsession
          by his chief complaint of persistent worries about contracting HIV, and also
          met Definitions 1 and 2 of compulsion by feeling driven to avoid touching
          surfaces outside of the home and to use disinfectant whenever that was not
          possible, with the aim of preventing getting sick.)
       The following are sample questions that APMHNs can incorporate into their
       interviews to validate information to meet the diagnostic criteria of OCD:
                                                             
       ·· Questions to validate DSM-5 diagnostic criteria of obsessions 1 and 2:
          ·· Would you describe in a little more detail your concerns and worries and
            how you manage those thoughts? For example, do you find yourself try-
            ing to ignore them or do something else to suppress them?
          ·· Do you ever have thoughts about specific concerns and worries that
            come into your mind even though you try not to think about them?
          ·· How hard is it to resist the thoughts or actions?
          ·· Do you believe these thoughts are senseless or unreasonable?
          ·· Do you avoid any situations that remind you of those upsetting thoughts?
       ·· Questions to validate DSM-5 diagnostic criteria of compulsions 1 and 2:
          ·· Is there a time that you made a conscious effort to stop disinfecting the
            surface of objects before you picked them up? If you did, what happened?
          ·· What happens if you don’t clean your hands with disinfectant after
            touching something?                              
          ·· Some people may pray, repeat words, or count numbers. Do you do any-
            thing like that?                                 
          ·· Do you have any other ways of neutralizing the upsetting thoughts?
          ·· How do your compulsive actions affect your work and social/personal
            life?                                            
       The following is a sample case exemplar of the initial psychiatric evaluation,
       including how the diagnosis of OCD is determined, and the proposed treatment
       plan and rationales.

=== Page 85 (1 cols) ===
74 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         Case Exemplar                                       
         The client’s initials are Mr. A.                    
                                                             
         A. Identification, Chief Complaint, and Reason for Referral
           Mr. A, a 22-year-old male, came to the mental health clinic for treatment
           of anxiety. He was self-referred, stating that his anxiety over contracting a
           disease like HIV had become overwhelming and out of control, affecting his
           work and social life.                             
         B. History of the Present Illness                   
                                                             
           At the beginning of the interview, the APMHN notes a strong disinfectant
           odor, and asks Mr. A if he used any cleaning disinfectant because of his con-
           cern about getting HIV. Mr. A states that all his life he has had fears and anxi-
           eties over catching germs, and he remembered washing his hands frequently,
           but they did not affect his daily functions and social life, as he was able to
           work and to have a relationship. He works full-time as a janitor, and he is glad
           that his job requires him to wear gloves and a mask. However, he is engaged in
           very few activities outside of work. Although he enjoys the company of others,
           he spends most of his free time at home out of fear that if he was invited out to
           a meal or to another person’s home, the thought of touching something would
           be too much for him to handle. He knows that his fears and urges are “crazy
           and not normal.” His symptoms got worse a year ago after one of his close
           friends died from HIV. He reported that he avoids touching almost anything
           outside of his home; if he even comes close to things that he thinks might have
           been in contact with germs, he washes his hands many times with bleach. He
           often washes his hands up to 30 times a day, spending hours on this routine.
           He tries to avoid all direct physical contact during grocery shopping, and tak-
           ing the subway to work has been a big problem, due to fear and anxiety over
           catching germs from other people. For the last several months, he has given up
           attending all social events and recently his long-time girlfriend threatened to
           leave him unless he got some help, so he decided to seek help today.
         C. Psychiatric History/Treatment/Hospitalizations   
           No past history of psychiatric treatment reported, either outpatient or inpa-
           tient in a hospital setting.                      
         D. Substance Use History                            
           Denied illicit drug use, including tobacco, denied drinking alcohol.
          E. Social and Developmental History                
           1. Education: High school drop-out in ninth grade.
           2. Family Relationship, Social Network, and Abuse History: Born in New
              York City and is an only child. Both parents are alive, but he has no
              close contact with them. Mr. A lives alone in a studio apartment and has
              a steady girlfriend. Highly limited social life due to his fear and anxiety.
              Denied a history of physical or sexual abuse.

=== Page 86 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 75
          3. Legal Records: No history of arrest or any pending legal case.
          4. Religious Background: Christian.                
        F. Family History                                    
                                                             
          No history of psychiatric illness among family and relatives reported. But
          Mr. A recalled that his father was always cleaning around the house and
          washing his hands excessively while he was growing up.
        G. Review of Systems                                 
          1. Vital signs: BP: 120/80; HR: 70; RR: 20; Temp: 98 F; Ht: 5’8”; Wt: 150 lbs.
          2. Review of systems showed no significant observable overall physical
            abnormalities except skin on both hands is dry, chapped, and raw from
            frequent washing with bleach.                    
          3. Allergies: No known allergies reported.         
          4. Had a physical examination by the primary care provider a week ago and
            reported to be “healthy” (will obtain the copy of the physical examination).
        H. Mental Status Examination                         
                                                             
          1. Appearance and Behavior: The client was a neatly dressed, 22-year-old
            Caucasian male, who appeared to be the stated age. He was cooperative
            and made good eye contact with the interviewer throughout the entire
            interview.                                       
          2. Mood: Anxious.                                  
          3. Affect: Irritable, mildly tense, and mood congruent.
          4. Thought Content and Process: Speech was fluent with normal tone
            and volume, linear and goal directed, and coherent. Thought contents
            indicated no evidence of loose associations, tangential thought, thought
            blocking, or other signs of formal thought disorders, including delusions
            or ideas of reference. Denied suicidal or homicidal ideations/intents/
            plans. However, recurrent and persistent thoughts of contracting HIV,
            followed by compulsive hand washing, are evident.
          5. Perceptual Disturbances: Denied any form of perceptual disturbances,
            including auditory, visual, or tactile hallucinations.
          6. Sensorium, Cognitive, and Intellectual Functioning: Alert and oriented
            × 3. There was no evidence of gross cognitive dysfunction at any point
            during the interview. The client acknowledged that he is often distracted
            from his work due to fear and anxiety over contamination, which leads
            to excessive hand washing.                       
         I. DSM-5 Diagnosis and Treatment Plan               
          1. DSM-5 Diagnosis: Obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
          2. Rationale for Diagnostic Impression: According to the DSM-5 (APA,
            2013), the following criteria must be present in order to diagnose OCD. Mr.
            A meets those criteria, as indicated by the bold symptom categories A–D:
            A. Presence of obsessions and compulsions. Mr. A has obsession man-
               ifested by the persistent thoughts of contamination, with fear of con-
               tracting HIV (definition of obsession 1). This causes Mr. A to avoid

=== Page 87 (1 cols) ===
76 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                leaving his apartment or engaging in social relationships (definition
                of obsession 2). He also has compulsion: repetitive and excessive
                hand washing (definition of compulsion 1), and the presence of anxi-
                ety and distress prior to hand washing (definition of compulsion 2).
              B. Time-consuming. Washing his hands up to 30 times a day, spending
                hours on this as a daily routine.            
              C. Impairment in function. His obsessive and compulsive behaviors
                have led to social isolation, a strain on his relationship with his girl-
                friend, and are a health hazard, as demonstrated by a skin condition
                on both hands.                               
              D. Differential diagnosis. Mr. A reported no known substance abuse,
                medical condition, or other mental disorders that may contribute to
                OCD symptoms.                                
             In conclusion, the APMHN concluded that Mr. A met the DSM-5 diagnos-
           tic Criteria A, B, C, and D of obsessive-compulsive disorder.
           3. Treatment Plan: OCD is a disabling psychopathology and there are dif-
              ferent ways to treat it, primarily through:    
              ·· Psychotherapies (e.g., cognitive behavioral therapy, exposure and
                response prevention [ERP] therapy, and brief strategic therapy).
              ·· Psychopharmacology (antidepressants).       
                                (Adapted from Pietrabissa et al., 2016).
                                                             
         Section 6: Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders   
         The DSM-5 groups together “trauma- and stressor-related disorders” as a cat-
         egory for individuals who have been exposed to a traumatic and/or stressful event,
         and who exhibit the most prominent clinical characteristics of internalizing anhe-
         donic and dysphoric symptoms and/or externalizing angry and aggressive symp-
         toms, or who exhibit dissociative symptoms. Five disorders are included under
         this category: (1) reactive attachment disorder; (2) disinhibited social engage-
         ment disorder; (3) post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD); (4) acute stress disorder
         (ASD); and (5) adjustment disorder (APA, 2013). Due to the complex develop-
         mental circumstances of childhood, the DSM-5 indicates that the diagnosis of
         reactive attachment disorder should be made with caution in children older than 5
         years; it further reports that disinhibited social engagement disorder has not been
         described in adults. Therefore, these two diagnoses are excluded here, as this book
         solely targets adult populations. Please refer to the DSM-5 for detailed informa-
         tion about them.                                    
          The lifetime prevalence of PTSD is estimated to be 8% in the general popula-
         tion: 10% in women and 4% in men. ASD tends to be identified in less than 20%
         of cases following traumatic events. Its prevalence following interpersonal trau-
         matic events, such as rape, assault, and/or witnessing a mass shooting, is 20–50%,
         and following non-interpersonal traumatic events is as follows: motor vehicle

=== Page 88 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 77
       accidents (13–21%), mild traumatic brain injury (14%), severe burns (10%),
       and industrial accidents (6–12%). The prevalence of adjustment disorders varies
       widely from approximately 5% to 20%, depending on the population studied and
       the assessment methods used (APA, 2013).              
         Both PTSD and ASD are marked by increased stress and anxiety following
       direct or indirect exposure to a traumatic or stressful event (e.g., violent accident,
       crime, military combat, or assault, being kidnapped, being involved in a natu-
       ral disaster, or experiencing systematic physical or sexual abuse). The individual
       reacts to the experience with fear and helplessness, persistently relives the event
       (e.g., in dreams and/or flashbacks), and tries to avoid being reminded of it. For
       ASD, the symptom pattern occurs within 3 days to 1 month after experiencing
       the event and resolves within that 1-month period, while for PTSD, the symptom
       pattern usually occurs within 3 months after experiencing the event and persists
       for more than 1 month (APA, 2013). Adjustment disorders are characterized by an
       emotional response to a stressful event, followed by symptom development. The
       common stressors for adult links to adjustment disorders involve financial issues,
       a medical illness, or a relational problem (Sadock et al., 2019). Although there are
       different diagnostic criteria for different trauma- and stressor-related disorders,
       all of these disorders have overlapping symptoms of anxiety and fear, coupled
       with different etiology. Table 2.14 summarizes the differential diagnosis among
       trauma- and stressor-related disorders.               
         In this section, PTSD is selected due to its association with high levels of
       social, occupational, and physical disability, as well as its considerable economic
       costs and high levels of medical utilization (APA, 2016).
                                                             
       Table 2.14 Differential Diagnosis among Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
       Diagnosis Onset of Symptoms Duration of Symptom Common Trauma or
              Following Trauma or Manifestation Stressor     
              Stressor                                       
       PTSD   Begins usually within                          
               the first 3 months                            
       ASD    Begins within                                  
               3 days to 1 month.                            
               However, ASD                                  
               can’t be diagnosed                            
               until 3 days after                            
               trauma                                        
       Adjustment Begins within                              
         disorder 3 months                                   
                         Varies from 3 months to             
                           more than 50 years                
                         Symptoms resolve within             
                           a 1-month period                  
                         Symptoms last no longer             
                           than 6 months after the           
                           stressor has ceased; if           
                           the stressor persists,            
                           symptoms become                   
                           persistent                        
                                       Violent accident, crime,
                                        military combat,     
                                        assault, kidnapping, 
                                        natural disaster,    
                                        systematic physical or
                                        sexual abuse, motor  
                                        vehicle accidents, rape,
                                        industrial accidents 
                                       Financial issues, medical
                                        illness, relational  
                                        problems

=== Page 89 (1 cols) ===
78 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         Diagnostic Criteria                                 
         DSM-5 PTSD Diagnostic Criteria Modified             
                                                             
         A. Etiology: Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual
           violence in one (or more) of the following ways:  
           1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).  
           2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it/they occurred to others.
           3. Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to a close family member
              or friend; the event(s) must have been violent or accidental.
           4. Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the
              traumatic event(s).                            
         B. Signs and Symptoms: Four major domains of symptom criteria are (1) intru-
           sion, (2) avoidance, (3) negative alterations in cognition and mood, and (4)
           alterations in arousal and reactivity.            
          B1. Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion symptoms associ-
              ated with the traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s)
              occurred:                                      
              1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the
                traumatic event(s).                          
              2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of
                the dream are related to the traumatic event(s).
              3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the individual
                feels or acts as if the traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reac-
                tions may occur on a continuum, with the most extreme expression
                being a complete loss of awareness of present surroundings.)
              4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal
                or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the trau-
                matic event(s).                              
              5. Marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues that
                symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).
          B2. Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic event(s),
              beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by one or
              both of the following:                         
              1. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or
                feelings about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
              2. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders (people, places,
                conversations, activities, objects, situations) that arouse distressing
                memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with the
                traumatic event(s).                          
          B3. Negative alterations in cognitions and mood associated with the trau-
              matic event(s), beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s)
              occurred, as evidenced by two (or more) of the following:

=== Page 90 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 79
            1. Inability to remember an important aspect of the traumatic event(s),
               typically due to dissociative amnesia, but not to other factors, such
               as head injury, alcohol, or drugs.            
            2. Persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about
               oneself, others, or the world (e.g., “I am bad,” “No one can be
               trusted,” “The world is completely dangerous,” “My whole nervous
               system is permanently ruined”).               
            3. Persistently distorted cognitions about the cause or consequences of
               the traumatic events(s) that lead the individual to blame themselves
               or others.                                    
            4. Persistent negative emotional state (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt, or
               shame).                                       
            5. Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities.
            6. Feelings of detachment or estrangement from others.
            7. Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (e.g., inability to
               experience happiness, satisfaction, or loving feelings).
         B4. Marked alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic
            event(s), beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred,
            as evidenced by two (or more) of the following:  
            1. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts with little or no provocation,
               typically expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people
               or objects.                                   
            2. Reckless or self-destructive behavior.        
            3. Hypervigilance.                               
            4. Exaggerated startle response.                 
            5. Problems with concentration.                  
            6. Sleep disturbance.                            
        C. Duration: PTSD signs and symptoms are present for more than 1 month.
        D. Impairment in Function: The signs and symptoms cause clinically signifi-
          cant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
          of functioning.                                    
        E. Differential Diagnosis: The symptoms are not attributable to the physiologi-
          cal effects of a substance (e.g., drug use, adverse reaction of medication) or
          other medical condition.                           
       In addition to the review of the differential diagnosis among trauma- and stressor-
       related disorders, it is essential that APMHNs have a working knowledge of its
       neurobiological basis, especially the role of brain circuits and related symptom
       dimensions, in order to understand how psychotropic medications have been
       used in its treatment. Box 2.6 briefly summarizes the neurobiological aspect of
       PTSD.

=== Page 91 (1 cols) ===
80 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                                                             
          Box 2.6 Neurobiological Theories of Post-Traumatic 
          Stress Disorder                                    
          Although there are different diagnostic criteria for different trauma- and
          stressor-related disorders, all of these disorders have overlapping symp-
          toms of anxiety and fear, coupled with different etiology. Trauma- and
          stressor-related symptoms are regulated by an amygdala-centered circuit;
          circuit malfunctioning may be traumatic in origin and conditioned in post-
          traumatic stress disorder (Stahl, 2013). The core characteristic symptoms
          of PTSD are anxiety while the traumatic event is being re-experienced,
          increased arousal, startle responses, sleep difficulties, including nightmares,
          and avoidance behaviors. Table 2.15 presents the core symptoms of PTSD
          in relation to the effected brain regions and circuits.
                                                             
          Table 2.15 Symptoms of PTSD in Brain Regions and Circuits
                                                             
          Core symptoms of PTSD Overactivation of amygdala circuit reciprocal or
                          activating connection with         
          Traumatic re-experiencing • Traumatic memories stored in the hippocampus
                           can activate the amygdala, causing the amyg-
                           dala, in turn, to activate other brain regions and
                           generate a fear response          
          Avoidance behaviors • Avoidance is a motor response which is regu-
                           lated by reciprocal connections between the
                           amygdala and periaqueductal gray  
          Increased arousal • Dysfunctional hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal
                           (HPA) axis                        
          Startle responses; fight/flight • Malfunctioning parabrachial nucleus (PBN)
            or freeze      plays a major role in transmitting real or poten-
                           tial threat signals to the extended amygdala
          Linking “fear” to amygdala • Malfunctioning of amygdala-centered circuits,
            circuits to neurotransmit- which are regulated by neurotransmitters (sero-
            ters and voltage-gated iron tonin, GABA, glutamate, norepinephrine) and
            channels       voltage-gated iron channels       
          Sleep difficulties, including • Dysfunctional HPA axis and anatomical altera-
            nightmares     tions in the hippocampus          
          Source: Adapted from Stahl (2013).                 
         Interviewing Techniques in Assessment of            
         Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder                      
         The following are examples of diagnostic interview questions for APMHNs to
         consider during the initial psychiatric evaluation of a client to help elicit the
         symptoms of PTSD and to formulate the final diagnosis based on a full mental

=== Page 92 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 81
       health assessment. The sample questions are based on the etiology of the trauma,
       such as a complicated childbirth, and the resulting symptoms that affect social and
       familial lives.                                       
                                                             
       Question #1: I see that it’s hard for you to talk about what happened during the
          delivery of your baby. Of course, I can review your medical records, but I
          would like to hear from you the way you experienced it. If not right now,
          maybe later. For now, would you share how the event has been affecting your
          life for the last 6 months?                        
            (Initially, building a rapport with the client while understanding and
          accepting her hesitance to share, but at the same time guiding the client to
          the importance of sharing her problems when she is ready. Meanwhile, tap
          on the post-traumatic experience with an open-ended question.)
       Question #2: Do you ever experience an overwhelming feeling related to the
          event forcing its way into your mind?              
       Question #3: Do you ever have nightmares about the event?
       Question #4: Do you ever experience flashbacks, like reliving visual or emotional
          memories of the event?                             
       Question #5: Do you ever feel like it’s happening all over again?
       (Questions 2–5 are questions to explore intrusive symptoms associated with the
          trauma.)                                           
       Question #6: Do you find yourself avoiding things that remind you of the event?
       Question #7: How hard is it for you to talk about the event?
       Question #8: Have you been avoiding activities that you used to enjoy?
            (Questions 6–8 are questions to explore avoidance symptoms associated
          with the trauma.)                                  
       Question #9: Would you share how the event has been affecting your life?
       Question #10: Have your friendships suffered?         
       Question #11: Are you still able to feel the same way toward your loved ones as
          before?                                            
       Question #12: Have you ever experienced numbness since the event?
       Question #13: Do you enjoy things that you used to enjoy since the event?
            (Questions 9–13 are questions to explore alterations in cognitions and
          mood associated with the trauma.)                  
       Question #14: Do you feel on edge more often than not since the event?
       Question #15: Do you find that you startle easily?    
       Question #16: Do you sleep well at night?             
       Question #17: Do you find yourself having a hard time focusing or concentrating?
            (Questions 14–17 are questions related to alterations in arousal and reac-
          tivity associated with the trauma.)                
       The following is a sample case exemplar of the initial psychiatric evaluation,
       including how the diagnosis of PTSD is determined, with the proposed treatment
       plan and rationales.

=== Page 93 (1 cols) ===
82 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         Case Exemplar                                       
         The client’s initials are SG.                       
                                                             
         A. Identification, Chief Complaint, and Reason for Referral
           SG is a 22-year-old Latina female, a single mother of a 6-month-old infant.
           She presented to the APMHN with a complaint of low libido affecting her
           relationship with her boyfriend, who is the father of the baby. SG claimed
           that she did not want to have intercourse due to a pronounced fear related to
           her traumatic childbirth experience, and her primary care provider referred
           her to the mental health clinic for psychiatric evaluation.
         B. History of the Present Illness                   
                                                             
           SG was highly reluctant to discuss what happened during the delivery of
           her daughter 6 months ago; therefore, the APMHN obtained and reviewed
           the client’s medical records, with her consent. According to the records, SG
           had an uncomplicated pregnancy, but was admitted to the hospital 1 week
           after her due date for an induction of labor, which took 3 days. SG went
           through extensive medical procedures and medications (cervidil PV, a cervi-
           cal balloon, artificial rupture of membranes, and pitocin IV) without relief of
           pain. Additionally, she developed preeclampsia with a severe range of blood
           pressures, requiring emergency intervention with medications (magnesium
           sulfate and labetalol). On day three, she reached full dilatation and pushed
           for 2 hours, at which time a prolonged fetal heart rate deceleration was noted
           and an emergency cesarean section was performed. The neonate was sent to
           the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and remained there for 3 days for
           meconium aspiration syndrome. SG also had a postpartum hemorrhage in the
           operating room (OR) and required a transfusion of 2 L packed red blood cells.
             Since the birth of her child, SG reported difficulty sleeping and frequent
           nightmares re-experiencing her hospital experience. She has been on edge
           all the time and easily startled. Memories of the baby’s birth are often so
           intrusive that they literally take over her life when they come, “like night-
           mares, but I’m awake.” She has avoided not only the hospital where she had
           the baby, but all hospitals, walking far out of her way to not see them. She
           won’t go to her daughter’s pediatrician appointments due to the anticipation
           that that would provoke memories of the baby’s birth (SG’s mother takes her
           to the appointments). Additionally, SG has avoided two of her close friends
           who were pregnant, saying “seeing them brings me too many memories.”
             She feels disconnected from her friends and thinks they wouldn’t under-
           stand what she has been through and would think she was weak and should
           have done things differently. SG’s mother has been staying with her to take
           care of the baby, and reported that SG is overprotective of her daughter, as she
           rarely lets the baby out of her sight. “Everything I do is to keep her safe.” At
           the same time, she does not feel joy or love for her daughter. Rather, she only
           experiences fear and anxiety, which leads to the overly protective behaviors.
           Initially, SG admitted that she did not feel connected to her daughter and in the

=== Page 94 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 83
          first few days of her life she rarely saw her, which she feels guilty about. SG
          has been feeling “distant” from her boyfriend in addition to avoiding physical
          intimacy. Her boyfriend complained to her that since the birth of their daugh-
          ter she won’t talk to him anymore and only snaps at him. She agreed with the
          boyfriend’s comments, saying that she often doesn’t even hear what he is say-
          ing because she is spaced out and then he gets annoyed with her.
            She has been angry and does not trust the medical system, saying, “I was
          so stupid before. I just trusted everyone to take care of me and my baby, but
          it doesn’t work like that.” She admitted that she has not been herself since
          the birth of her daughter, and has been feeling “on edge” all the time and is
          easily startled.                                   
            SG denied suicidal ideation/intent/plan and reported no delusions or hallu-
          cinations. She recognizes that she cannot continue to live as she currently is.
          She would like to be able to stop having flashbacks and intrusive memories
          and wants to have a “normal” relationship with her boyfriend and be able to
          relax and enjoy being a mother. She misses her friends and wants to feel at
          ease around them again.                            
        C. Psychiatric History/Rx/Hospitalizations           
          No past history of psychiatric treatments was reported, either outpatient or in
          an inpatient hospital setting. No prior diagnosed psychiatric symptoms before
          the onset of the current episode.                  
        D. Substance Use History                             
                                                             
          SG denies tobacco or illicit drug use, and used to have two to three drinks
          socially at parties.                               
        E. Social and Developmental History                  
          1. Education: Completion of graduate program in education.
          2. Family Relationship, Social Network, and Abuse History: SG is an only
            child and her parents divorced when she was 10 years old. Following the
            divorce, she lived with her mother. SG claimed that she was sexually
            assaulted by her mother’s boyfriend when she was 15 years old and she
            went to live with her father. However, she did not disclose the incident
            until she was 17, after her mother had broken up with the perpetrator.
            They never pressed charges as “he had moved back to his country.” She
            did not seek any help at the time since her mother and her friends helped
            her get through the trauma. Currently, she is living with her boyfriend
            who has been supportive of her, and the mother has been helping her to
            take care of the newborn baby.                   
          3. Legal Records: No history of arrest or any pending legal case.
          4. Religious Background: Christian.                
        F. Family History                                    
          SG denies any family history of mental illness or medical issues.

=== Page 95 (1 cols) ===
84 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         G. Review of Systems                                
           1. Vital signs: BP: 110/60; HR: 80; RR: 24; Temp: 98 F; Ht: 5’5”; Wt: 125 lbs.
           2. Review of systems showed no significant observable overall physical
              abnormalities.                                 
           3. Allergies: No known allergies reported.        
           4. Monthly visits to OB/GYN for close monitoring of anemia due to hem-
              orrhage during childbirth and postpartum care. The last visit was a week
              ago and SG reported that she was informed that she has made a full
              physical recovery, but was recommended to seek mental health care.
         H. Mental Status Examination                        
                                                             
           1. Appearance and Behavior: The client was a neatly dressed, 22-year-old
              Latina female, who appeared to be the stated age. Overall, she was coop-
              erative during the interview but initially hesitant to engage in the conver-
              sation and avoided eye contact with the interviewer.
           2. Mood: Anxious.                                 
           3. Affect: Guided and mood congruent.             
           4. Thought Content and Process: Speech was fluent with normal tone of
              voice, and linear, goal directed, and coherent. Thought contents indicated
              no evidence of loose associations, tangential thought, thought blocking,
              or other signs of a formal thought disorder, including delusions or ideas
              of reference. Denied suicidal or homicidal ideations/intents/plans.
           5. Perceptual Disturbances: Denied any forms of perceptual disturbances,
              including auditory, visual, or tactile hallucinations.
           6. Sensorium, Cognitive, and Intellectual Functioning: Alert and oriented ×
              3. There was no evidence of gross cognitive dysfunction at any point dur-
              ing the interview. The client is insightful of her fear and anxiety related to
              what occurred during childbirth, and of its impact on her life in general.
          I. Diagnosis and Treatment Plan                    
           1. DSM-5 Diagnosis: Post-traumatic stress disorder.
           2. Rationale for Diagnostic Impression: According to the DSM-5 (APA,
              2013), the following criteria must be present to diagnose PTSD. SG
              meets these criteria, as indicated by the bold symptom categories A–F:
              A. Etiology: Directly experiencing the traumatic events. This criterion
                was met with the client’s traumatic near-death experience from the
                complicated medical crises during the 3-day delivery of her baby.
              B. Signs and Symptoms:                         
             B1. Intrusion Symptoms: Presence of one (or more) of the following
                intrusion symptoms associated with the traumatic event(s), begin-
                ning after the traumatic event(s) occurred:  
              1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the
                traumatic event(s). SG often experienced the intrusive distressing
                memories of the baby’s birth.

=== Page 96 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 85
            2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or effect of
               the dream are related to the traumatic event(s). SG reported diffi-
               culty sleeping, with frequent nightmares re-experiencing her trau-
               matic event when she was in the hospital.     
            3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the individual
               feels or acts as if the traumatic event(s) were recurring. SG often
               didn’t even hear what her boyfriend was saying to her because she
               was “spaced out.” And memories of the baby’s birth were often so
               intrusive that they literally took over her life when they came, “like
               nightmares, but I’m awake.”                   
            4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal
               or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic
               event(s). When SG saw two of her close friends who were pregnant,
               it brought back too many memories of her own childbirth experience.
            5. Marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues that
               symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).
            SG’s symptoms meet four out of five (requires two or more) symptom
          categories of B1 (1, 2, 3, 4).                     
            B2. Persistent Avoidance Symptoms: Persistent avoidance of stimuli
               associated with the traumatic events, beginning after the traumatic
               event(s) occurred, as evidenced by one or both of the following:
            1. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts,
               or feelings about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
               Socially, SG has avoided two of her close friends who were preg-
               nant, saying “seeing them brings me too many memories.”
            2. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders (people, places,
               conversations, activities, objects, situations) that arouse distressing
               memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely associated with the
               traumatic event(s). SG has avoided not only the hospital where she
               was treated but all hospitals by walking far out of her way to not see
               them. She won’t go to her daughter’s pediatrician appointments due
               to the anticipation that that would provoke memories of the baby’s
               birth. SG’s mother takes her daughter to the appointments.
            SG’s symptoms meet both (requires one or both) B2 symptom categories
          (1, 2).                                            
            B3. Negative Alterations in Cognition and Mood: Negative altera-
               tions in cognition and mood associated with the traumatic event(s),
               beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evi-
               denced by two (or more) of the following:     
            1. Persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about
               oneself, others, or the world. “I was so stupid before. I just trusted
               everyone to take care of me and my baby, but it doesn’t work like
               that”; “I was weak and should have done things differently.”
            2. Persistent negative emotional state (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt,
               or shame). SG has been angry toward the medical team, and

=== Page 97 (1 cols) ===
86 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                feels guilty over her continuing lack of feelings toward the baby,
                and sad about not being able to enjoy her baby as she thinks she
                should.                                      
              3. Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant
                activities. SG is isolating herself by not going out with her friends,
                and by lack of interest in engaging in physical intimacy with her
                boyfriend.                                   
              4. Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (e.g., inability
                to experience happiness, satisfaction, or loving feelings). SG has
                been feeling guilty that she has no feelings of joy or love toward the
                baby. Her fear and anxiety have led her to be overprotective of her
                daughter, as she rarely lets the baby out of her sight.
             SG’s symptoms meet four (requires two or more) B3 symptom categories
           (1, 2, 3, 4).                                     
             B4. Marked alterations in arousal and reactivity: Associated with
                the traumatic event(s), beginning or worsening after the traumatic
                event(s) occurred, as evidenced by two (or more) of the following:
              1. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts with little or no provoca-
                tion, typically expressed as verbal or physical aggression toward
                people or objects. Her boyfriend complains to her that since the birth
                of their daughter, she won’t talk to him and only snaps at him.
              2. Reckless or self-destructive behavior.      
              3. Hypervigilance. She has been feeling “on edge” all the time.
              4. Exaggerated startle response. SB has been easily startled.
              5. Problems with concentration.                
              6. Sleep disturbance. SB has been experiencing difficulty sleeping,
                with frequent nightmares.                    
             SG’s symptoms meet four (requires two or more) of the B4 symptom cat-
           egories (1, 3, 4, 6).                             
              C. Duration: PTSD signs and symptoms are present for more than 1
                month. SG’s PTSD symptoms have been present persistently for 6
                months since the delivery of the baby.       
              D. Impairment in Function: The signs and symptoms cause clinically
                significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
                important areas of functioning. SG has not been able to function
                independently due to the current symptoms, and requires assistance
                with childcare from her mother. Her social activities are highly
                affected, as she avoids seeing her friends.  
              E. Differential Diagnosis: The symptoms are not attributable to the
                physiological effects of a substance (e.g., drug use, medication) or
                medical condition. SG denied any history of substance use and no
                treatable medical conditions other than postpartum care.
             In conclusion, the APMHN concluded that SG met the DSM-5 diagnostic
           criteria for PTSD.

=== Page 98 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 87
          3. Treatment Plan and Summary:                     
              Postpartum PTSD can adversely affect women’s well-being, mother–
            infant relationships, and child development. Treatment plans for the
            PTSD client in general:                          
            ·· The emphasis should be on education about the disorder and treat-
               ment for it, both psychotherapeutic and psychopharmacological. At
               any point during assessment or treatment, pressing a client to talk
               about a trauma who is reluctant to do so would be counterproductive
               and may exacerbate symptom manifestations (Sadock et al., 2019).
            ·· In terms of psychotherapy, trauma-focused psychological interven-
               tions (TFPT), including exposure therapy, trauma-focused cognitive
               behavioral therapy, and eye-movement desensitization and reprocess-
               ing (EMDR) were reported to be effective in reducing postpartum
               PTSD symptoms in both the short- (up to 3 months postpartum) and
               medium- (3–6 months postpartum) term. However, no robust evidence
               suggests that TFPT can also improve women’s recovery from clini-
               cally significant postpartum PTSD symptoms (Furuta et al., 2018).
            ·· Psychopharmacological interventions are also reported to be effec-
               tive; the use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and tricyclic
               agents is supported by a number of well-controlled clinical trials
               (Sadock et al., 2019).                        
            ·· Additional support for the client and family can be obtained through
               local and national support groups for clients with PTSD.
       Section 7: Feeding and Eating Disorders               
       Feeding and eating disorders are characterized by persistent disturbance of eating
       or eating-related behaviors that results in altered consumption or absorption of food
       and significantly impacts the affected individual’s physical health and/or psycho-
       social functioning. According to the DSM-5, feeding and eating disorders include
       six distinctively specified disorders: (1) pica, (2) rumination disorder, (3) avoidant/
       restrictive food intake disorder, (4) anorexia nervosa, (5) bulimia nervosa, and (6)
       binge-eating disorder. Despite a number of common psychological and behavioral
       features, each disorder differs substantially in clinical course, outcome, and treat-
       ment needs. However, a diagnosis of pica may be assigned in the presence of any
       other feeding and eating disorder. Finally, obesity is not considered to be a mental
       disorder and therefore is not included in the DSM-5. The prevalence of pica, rumi-
       nation disorder, and avoidant/restrictive food intake disorders is reported as incon-
       clusive compared to other eating disorders. Twelve-month prevalence of anorexia
       nervosa among young females is approximately 0.4%, but far less common in males
       than in females, with an approximately 10:1 female-to-male ratio. Twelve-month
       prevalence of bulimia nervosa among young females is 1–1.5%, also less common
       in males than in females, with the same approximately 10:1 female-to-male ratio.
       Twelve-month prevalence of binge-eating disorder among female and male adults
       (age 18 or older) is 1.6% and 0.8%, respectively (APA, 2013) (Tables 2.16 and 2.17).

=== Page 99 (1 cols) ===
T                                                    
        a b                                                  
        l                                                    
        e                                                    
        2                                                    
        .                                                    
        1 6                                                  
        D                                                    
        i                                                    
        ff                                                   
        e                                                    
        r                                                    
        e                                                    
        n                                                    
        t                                                    
        i                                                    
        a l                                                  
        D i a g n o s i s a m                                
        o n g F e e d i n                                    
        g a n d                                              
        E a t i n                                            
        g D i s                                              
        o r                                                  
        d                                                    
        e r                                                  
        s                                                    
           D                                                 
           i a                                               
           g                                                 
           n                                                 
           o                                                 
           s                                                 
           i s                                               
           E                                                 
           a t i                                             
           n g P a t t e r n o r                             
           E a t i n g - R e l                               
           a t e d                                           
           B e h a v i                                       
           o r                                               
           D                                                 
           i                                                 
           a                                                 
           g n o s t i c M a r k e r s                       
             P                                               
             i c                                             
             a                                               
                 R                                           
                 u                                           
                 m                                           
                 i                                           
                 n                                           
                 a t                                         
                 i o                                         
                 n                                           
                   d i                                       
                   s                                         
                   o                                         
                   r                                         
                   d e                                       
                   r                                         
                       A                                     
                       v                                     
                       o i                                   
                       d                                     
                       a                                     
                       n                                     
                       t /                                   
                        r                                    
                        e                                    
                        s                                    
                        t r                                  
                        i                                    
                        c t i                                
                        v                                    
                        e                                    
                        f                                    
                        o                                    
                        o                                    
                        d                                    
                          i                                  
                          n                                  
                          t                                  
                          a                                  
                          k                                  
                          e                                  
                          d                                  
                          i                                  
                          s                                  
                          o                                  
                          r                                  
                          d                                  
                          e                                  
                          r                                  
                            A                                
                            n                                
                            o r                              
                            e                                
                            x                                
                            i                                
                            a                                
                            n                                
                            e                                
                            r                                
                            v                                
                            o                                
                            s                                
                            a                                
                              (                              
                              A                              
                              N                              
                              )                              
                                      B                      
                                      u l                    
                                      i                      
                                      m                      
                                      i                      
                                      a                      
                                      n                      
                                      e                      
                                      r                      
                                      v                      
                                      o                      
                                      s                      
                                      a                      
                                        (                    
                                        B                    
                                        N                    
                                        )                    
                                              B              
                                              i n            
                                              g              
                                              e              
                                              -              
                                              e              
                                              a t i          
                                              n              
                                              g              
                                                d i          
                                                s            
                                                o            
                                                r            
                                                d e          
                                                r            
                                                (            
                                                B            
                                                E            
                                                D )          
             P e r                                           
             s i s t e n t e a t i n g                       
             o f n o n n u t r                               
             i t i v e ,                                     
             n o n f o                                       
             o d s u                                         
             b s                                             
             t                                               
             a n                                             
             c                                               
             e                                               
             s                                               
             -                                               
             ·                                               
             ·                                               
               ·                                             
               ·                                             
                ·                                            
                ·                                            
                 R                                           
                 e p                                         
                 e a t e d r e g u r g i t                   
                 a t i o n o f f o                           
                 o d                                         
                 ·                                           
                 ·                                           
                   R e                                       
                   g u r g i t a t e d f o o                 
                   d m a y b e r                             
                   e - c h e                                 
                   w e d , r                                 
                   e - s w                                   
                   a l l                                     
                   o                                         
                   w                                         
                   e                                         
                   d ,                                       
                   -                                         
                   ·                                         
                   ·                                         
                    o                                        
                    r s p i t o u t                          
                    ·                                        
                    ·                                        
                     ·                                       
                     ·                                       
                       A p                                   
                       p a r e n t l a c k o f               
                       i n t e r e s t i n                   
                       e a t i n                             
                       g o r f o                             
                       o d                                   
                       -                                     
                       ·                                     
                       ·                                     
                        A v                                  
                        o i d a n c e b a s e d              
                        o n s e n s o r                      
                        y c h a r                            
                        a c t e r i                          
                        s t i c s                            
                        o f                                  
                        f                                    
                        o                                    
                        o                                    
                        d                                    
                        -                                    
                        ·                                    
                        ·                                    
                          C o                                
                          n c e r n a b o u t a              
                          v e r s i v e c o n                
                          s e q u e                          
                          n c e s                            
                          o f e a t                          
                          i n                                
                          g                                  
                          -                                  
                          ·                                  
                          ·                                  
                           ·                                 
                           ·                                 
                            R e                              
                            s t r i c t i o n o f e n        
                            e r g y i n t a k e              
                            r e l a t i                      
                            v e t o                          
                            r e q u i                        
                            r e                              
                            m e                              
                            n                                
                            t                                
                            s                                
                            -                                
                            ·                                
                            ·                                
                              b                              
                              y s e m i - s t a r v a t      
                              i o n , p u r g i n            
                              g b e h                        
                              a v i o r s                    
                              , l a x                        
                              a t i                          
                              v                              
                              e                              
                              ·                              
                              ·                              
                               a                             
                               n d / o r d i u r e t i c     
                               a b u s e , e x c             
                               e s s i v e                   
                               p h y s i                     
                               c a l a                       
                               c t i                         
                               v                             
                               i t                           
                               y                             
                               ·                             
                               ·                             
                                 ·                           
                                 ·                           
                                  ·                          
                                  ·                          
                                   ·                         
                                   ·                         
                                     ·                       
                                     ·                       
                                      R e                    
                                      c u r r e n t e p i s o d
                                      e s o f b i n g e      
                                      e a t i n              
                                      g i n a                
                                      d i s c r              
                                      e t                    
                                      e                      
                                      -                      
                                      ·                      
                                      ·                      
                                        p                    
                                        e r i o d o f t i m e
                                       ·                     
                                       ·                     
                                         R e                 
                                         c u r r e n t i n a p p r
                                         o p r i a t e c o   
                                         m p e n s           
                                         a t o r y           
                                         b e h a             
                                         v i                 
                                         o r                 
                                         s                   
                                         i                   
                                         n                   
                                         -                   
                                         ·                   
                                         ·                   
                                          o                  
                                          r d e r t o p r e v e n
                                          t w e i g h t g a  
                                          i n — e            
                                          . g . , s e        
                                          l f - i n          
                                          d u                
                                          c                  
                                          e d                
                                          ·                  
                                          ·                  
                                            v                
                                            o m i t i n g , m i s u
                                            s e o f l a x a t i
                                            v e s , d        
                                            i u r e t i      
                                            c s , f a        
                                            s t i            
                                            n                
                                            g ,              
                                            ·                
                                            ·                
                                             e               
                                             x c e s s i v e e x e r c
                                             i s e           
                                              R e            
                                              c u r r e n t e p i s o d
                                              e s o f b i n g e
                                              e a t i n      
                                              g a n d        
                                              l a c k        
                                              o f            
                                              -              
                                              ·              
                                              ·              
                                                c            
                                                o n t r o l o v e r e a t
                                                i n g d u r i n g
                                                t h e e      
                                                p i s o d e  
                                                ·            
                                                ·            
                                                 N o         
                                                 t a s s o c i a t e d w
                                                 i t h i n a p p r o
                                                 p r i a t e 
                                                 c o m       
                                                 p e n s a   
                                                 t o         
                                                 r           
                                                 y           
                                                 -           
                                                  b          
                                                  e h a v i o r s
                                                  ·          
                                                  ·          
             C h i l d h o o d o n s e t i s m o             
             s t c                                           
             o                                               
             m                                               
             m                                               
             o                                               
             n                                               
             l                                               
             y                                               
             r                                               
             e                                               
             p                                               
             o                                               
             r                                               
             t                                               
             e                                               
             d                                               
               A b d o m i n a l o b s t r u c t i o n L a b t e s t t o a s c e r t a i n l e
                v e l s                                      
                o                                            
                f                                            
                p                                            
                o                                            
                i                                            
                s                                            
                o                                            
                n i                                          
                n                                            
                g                                            
                o                                            
                r                                            
                t                                            
                h                                            
                e                                            
                n                                            
                a                                            
                t                                            
                u                                            
                r                                            
                e                                            
                o                                            
                f                                            
                i                                            
                n                                            
                f                                            
                e                                            
                c                                            
                t                                            
                i                                            
                o                                            
                n                                            
                 M a l n u t r i t i o n G r o w t h d e l a y W e i g h t l o s s o r l o w w e i
                    g h t                                    
                      S y m p t o m s m a y o c c u r i      
                      n t                                    
                      h                                      
                      e                                      
                      c                                      
                      o                                      
                      n                                      
                      t                                      
                      e                                      
                      x                                      
                      t                                      
                      o                                      
                      f                                      
                      i                                      
                      n                                      
                      t                                      
                      e                                      
                      l                                      
                      l                                      
                      e                                      
                      c                                      
                      t                                      
                      u                                      
                      a                                      
                      l                                      
                      d                                      
                      i                                      
                      s                                      
                      a                                      
                      b                                      
                      i                                      
                      l                                      
                      i                                      
                      t                                      
                      y                                      
                       M a l n u t r i t i o n L o w w e i g h t G r o w t h d e l a y N e e d f o r a r t i fi c i a l n u t r i
                           t i o                             
                           n                                 
                            L e u k o p e n i a , m i l d a n e
                            m i a                            
                              H y p e r c h o l e s t e r o l e m i a E l e v a t e d h e p a t i c e n z y
                               m e                           
                                 M e t a b o l i c a l k a l o s i s M e t a b o l i c a c i d o s i s L o w s e r u m m i n e r a l l e v
                                   e l (                     
                                   m                         
                                   a                         
                                   g                         
                                   n                         
                                   e                         
                                   s                         
                                   i                         
                                   u                         
                                   m                         
                                   ,                         
                                   z                         
                                   i                         
                                   n                         
                                   c                         
                                   ,                         
                                   p                         
                                   h                         
                                   o                         
                                   s                         
                                   p                         
                                   h                         
                                   a                         
                                   t                         
                                   e                         
                                   )                         
                                     E l e v a t e d a m y l a s e l e v e l E l e c t r o l y t e a b n o r m a l i t i
                                      e s                    
                                        M e t a b o l i c a l k a l o s i s M e t a b o l i c a c i d o s i s P e r m a n e n t l o s s o f d e n t
                                          a l e              
                                          n                  
                                          a                  
                                          m                  
                                          e                  
                                          l                  
                                            C a r d i a c a n d s k e l e t a l m
                                            y o p            
                                            a                
                                            t                
                                            h                
                                            i e              
                                            s                
                                              W e i g h t g a i n C r o s s o v e r f r o m b i n g e -
                                                e a t i      
                                                n            
                                                g            
                                                d i          
                                                s            
                                                o            
                                                r            
                                                d            
                                                e            
                                                r            
                                                t            
                                                o            
                                                o t          
                                                h            
                                                e            
                                                r            
                                                e            
                                                a            
                                                t            
                                                i            
                                                n            
                                                g            
                                                d            
                                                i            
                                                s            
                                                o            
                                                r            
                                                d            
                                                e            
                                                r            
                                                s            
                                                i            
                                                s            
                                                 u n c o m m o n D y s f u n c t i o n a l d i e t i n g
                                                  u s u      
                                                  a l        
                                                  l          
                                                  y          
                                                  p          
                                                  r          
                                                  e          
                                                  c          
                                                  e          
                                                  d          
                                                  e          
                                                  s          
                                                  t          
                                                  h          
                                                  e          
                                                  o          
                                                  n          
                                                  s          
                                                  e          
                                                  t          
                                                  o          
                                                  f          
                                                  b          
                                                  i          
                                                  n          
                                                  g          
                                                  e          
                                                  e          
                                                  a          
                                                  t          
                                                  i          
                                                  n          
                                                  g          
         88 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                                                     S       
                                                     o u     
                                                     r c     
                                                     e       
                                                     :       
                                                     A d     
                                                     a       
                                                     p       
                                                     t       
                                                     e       
                                                     d       
                                                     f       
                                                     r       
                                                     o       
                                                     m       
                                                     D       
                                                     S       
                                                     M - 5 , A P A ( 2 0 1 3
                                                     ) .

=== Page 100 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 89
                                                             
       Table 2.17 Indications of High Medical Risk and Inpatient Treatment
                                                             
       Indication Medical Risk                               
       Weight   BMI <14 kg/m2 or rapid weight loss           
       Medical status Heart rate <50 bpm, cardiac arrhythmia, postural tachycardia (increase
                  >20 bpm), blood pressure <80/50 mm Hg, postural hypotension
                  >20 mm Hg, QTc >450 ms, temperature <35.5°C, hypokalemia
                  <3.0 mmol/L, neutropenia, phosphate <0.5 mmol/L
       Additional ·· Severe binge eating and purging several times daily
         indicators ·· Failure to respond to outpatient or day-patient treatment
                ·· Severe psychiatric comorbidity            
                ·· Suicidality                               
       Source: Adapted from Hay et al. (2014).               
         In addition to the review of the differential diagnosis among feeding and eating
       disorders, it is essential that APMHNs have a working knowledge of its neuro-
       biological basis, especially the role of the brain structure and reward pathways
       circuits, and altered brain activity across eating disorders. Box 2.7 presents a sum-
       mary of neurobiological findings on eating disorders. 
                                                             
         Box 2.7 Neurobiological Findings on Eating Disorders
                                                             
         Research on eating disorders has identified the importance of the short-
         term impact of ED behaviors on the brain structure, as brain reward path-
         ways are most consistently implicated in altered brain activity across EDs
         (Table 2.18).                                       
         Table 2.18 Summary of Neurobiological Findings in Eating Disorders
                                                             
         Brain structure and Altered brain activity across eating disorders
         reward pathways                                     
         Neurochemistry                                      
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         Gray matter (GM)                                    
          volume and cortical                                
          thickness                                          
                     • Serotonin 1A receptor increased in ill AN and BN
                     • Serotonin 2A receptor normal in ill AN, decreased in
                      recurrent AN                           
                     • Hormones, neuropeptides altered in all EDs, often
                      normalize with recovery; may interfere with appetite
                      regulation and reward system           
                     • Cytokines increased in ill AN and BN; normalize with
                      recovery                               
                     • Cortical volume and thickness vary among studies in
                      EDs, probably due to confounding factors, such as mal-
                      nutrition, dehydration, comorbidity, and medication use
                     • Lower volume or thickness in AN frequently normalize
                      with weight restoration

=== Page 101 (1 cols) ===
90 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
          White matter (WM)                                  
            volume, integrity,                               
            and structural                                   
            connectivity                                     
                                                             
          Functional and                                     
            effective                                        
            connectivity                                     
                                                             
          Task-based fMRI                                    
            studies                                          
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
          Microbiota and                                     
            microbiome                                       
                      • WM volume varies similarly to GM studies
                      • Fractional anisotropy (FA) thought to reflect fiber
                        integrity, tends to be lower in AN and BN
                      • Lower FA may be compensated for in AN and BN
                        with increased fiber development between insula and
                        orbitofrontal cortex                 
                      • Increased and decreased functional connectivity in
                        default mode network (interoception), salience network
                        (orientation to food stimuli), and executive control
                        network (decision-making) in AN and BN
                      • Effective connectivity to the hypothalamus in AN, BN
                        may override hunger signals          
                      • Reward circuits are consistently altered to food stimuli
                        in insula, striatum, orbitofrontal cortex
                      • Altered prediction error response to food and monetary
                        stimuli suggest altered dopamine circuit response in AN,
                        BN, and BED                          
                      • Perception, increased and decreased in insula, parietal,
                        and visual cortex to interoception or visual perception
                        tasks                                
                      • AN is associated with reduced insula neural taste
                        discrimination                       
                      • Cognition tasks often increased and decreased brain
                        response in AN although behavior response mostly normal
                      • BN had increased striatal and worse behavior response
                        when distracted by food images       
                      • Social interaction, gentle touch, and visual intimate
                        stimuli were associated with decreased brain response
                        and decreased pleasantness ratings   
                      • Decreased diversity of gut microbial cells (microbiota)
                        in AN, may normalize with weight restoration
          Source: Adapted from Frank et al. (2019).          
         In this section, anorexia nervosa is chosen as an example to address the mental
         status assessment and diagnostic evaluation of feeding and eating disorders, as it
         represents the classic condition in this group of disorders.
         Diagnostic Criteria                                 
         DSM-5 Anorexia Nervosa Diagnostic Criteria Modified 
         A. Signs and Symptoms:                              
           1. Restriction of energy intake relative to requirements, leading to a sig-
              nificantly low body weight in the context of age, sex, developmental
              trajectory, and physical health. Significantly low body weight is defined
              as weight that is less than minimally normal.  
           2. Intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, and/or persistent
              behavior that interferes with weight gain, even though at a significantly
              low body weight.

=== Page 102 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 91
          3. Disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight or shape is experi-
            enced, undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or
            persistent lack of recognition of the seriousness of the current low body
            weight.                                          
        B. Subtype Specifier:                                
                                                             
          1. Restricting type: During the last 3 months, the individual has not
            engaged in recurrent episodes of binge eating or purging behaviors (e.g.,
            self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas).
            This subtype describes presentations in which weight loss is accom-
            plished primarily through dieting, fasting, and/or excessive exercise.
          2. Binge-eating/purging type: During the last 3 months, the individual has
            engaged in recurrent episodes of binge eating or purging behaviors.
        C. Remission Specifier:                              
          1. In partial remission: After full criteria for anorexia nervosa were pre-
            viously met, Criterion A1 (low body weight) has not been met for a
            sustained period, but either Criterion A2 (intense fear of gaining weight
            or of becoming fat and/or behavior that interferes with weight gain) or
            Criterion A3 (disturbance in self-perception of body weight and shape)
            is still met.                                    
          2. In full remission: After full criteria for anorexia nervosa were previ-
            ously met, none of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of
            time.                                            
        D. Current Severity Specifier:                       
          The minimum level of severity for adults is based on current body mass
          index: Mild (≥17.0 kg/m2 BMI), moderate (16–16.99 kg/m2 BMI), severe
          (15–15.99 kg/m2 BMI), and extreme (<15 kg/m2 BMI). A normal body mass
          index is 18.5–24.9 kg/m2.                          
                                                             
       The nutritional compromise associated with anorexia nervosa could result in
       physiological disturbances, such as amenorrhea and abnormal vital signs. While
       most of these are reversible with nutritional rehabilitation, other conditions, such
       as loss of bone mineral density, are often not completely reversible.
                                                             
       Interviewing Techniques in Assessment of Anorexia Nervosa
       Clients with anorexia nervosa are usually guarded and tend to minimize their
       symptoms; therefore, establishing rapport is crucial at the beginning of the inter-
       view, while maintaining a high index of suspicion. If the client has difficulty
       responding, the APMHN needs to be more active, while being patient with this
       difficulty. The following questions are examples for the APMHN to consider
       when evaluating a client’s presenting symptoms to formulate a final diagnosis of
       anorexia nervosa, based on the DSM-5 symptom criteria.

=== Page 103 (1 cols) ===
92 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
         Criterion A1: Self-induced weight loss              
         Questions:                                          
                                                             
         ·· Sometimes people may use different ways of losing weight, such as exer-
           cise, fat burners, laxatives. How do you lose weight or prevent yourself from
           putting on weight? (This question is a normalizing statement to assist with
           information gathering.)                           
                                                             
         Criterion A2: Morbid fear of fatness                
         Questions:                                          
         ·· What is your height and your weight? (Calculate BMI)
         ·· Are you concerned about your weight?             
         ·· Are you afraid of gaining weight?                
         ·· What have you done to prevent yourself from gaining weight?
                                                             
                                                             
         Criterion A3: Body image disturbance                
         Questions:                                          
         ·· What do you think your ideal weight is?          
         ·· What do you see when you look in the mirror?     
         ·· Can you envision yourself and draw what you look like now, and what you
           would like to look like?                          
                                                             
         Criterion B: Subtype specifier                      
                                                             
         Restricting type: During the last 3 months, have you kept dieting, fasting, and/or
           exercising to lose weight without binge eating or purging, like forcing your-
           self to throw up or excessively using enemas, laxatives, or diuretics?
         Binge-eating/purging type: During the last 3 months, have you been repeatedly
           binge eating or purging, like forcing yourself to throw up or excessively using
           enemas, laxatives, or diuretics?                  
         The following is a case exemplar of the initial psychiatric evaluation, including
         how the diagnosis of anorexia nervosa is determined, the proposed treatment plan,
         and rationales.                                     
                                                             
         Case Exemplar                                       
         The client’s initial is S.                          
         A. Identification, Chief Complaint, and Reason for Referral
                                                             
           S is a 25-year-old Caucasian female, employed, lives with her husband. She
           was brought in by her husband when she complained of fatigue, palpitations,
           and abdominal pain. He reported that his wife has been using laxatives regu-
           larly after she complained of constipation about 3 months ago.

=== Page 104 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 93
        B. History of Present Illness                        
          S presented to a local community tertiary care center with complaints of
          excessive tiredness and two episodes of syncope in the last 2 months. S was
          hesitant to engage in the interview initially and her husband started to talk in
          her place. The APMHN redirected to the client with gentle probing, and she
          started to report her gradual loss of weight, recurrent episodes of vomiting
          for a period of 2 years, menstrual irregularities for 1 year, and amenorrhea
          for the last 6 months. According to the husband, the probable precipitating
          factor was when he made a critical comment about S’ weight 3 years ago,
          during their early days of marriage. The husband claimed that he had casually
          made a remark about her being slightly heavy near her trunk and thighs, and
          that she would look more beautiful if she reduced it. Since then, her intake
          of food has decreased. She eventually developed a morbid fear of looking
          fat and ugly, and began eating a handful of fennel seeds to facilitate diges-
          tion. She would use a soap water enema and occasionally use laxatives. Her
          weight dropped steadily from 130 lbs to 88 lbs over the 3-year period. She
          completely avoided all foods with a high caloric value. She gradually began
          to skip breakfast and would have minimal lunch. She began to avoid eating
          in front of other family members. At times, she would hide and eat, and/or
          would secretly go into the bathroom and induce vomiting. She expressed that
          her mood has been down, and that she is tired, apathetic, has decreased atten-
          tion and concentration, and feels empty and pessimistic about her future. S’
          husband concurred with what the client reported and reiterated that the client
          has been dull and inactive most of the time and their marriage has been in tur-
          moil, as she has not been able to carry out her daily living adequately. With
          symptoms of weight loss and amenorrhea, she reported that she had a series
          of medical workups a month ago and that all tests were within normal limits
          except low hemoglobin. Based on her past history, the APMHN suspected
          that S might minimize her eating disorder’s impact on her overall health.
        C. Past Psychiatric History                          
          Patient denies any history of psychiatric diagnosis and her husband also said
          he does not know of any mental illness. No suicidal ideas or unusual percep-
          tual experiences were reported. However, the client was hospitalized three
          times for electrolyte imbalance and she was reluctant to elaborate about the
          reasons for the past hospitalizations.             
        D. Substance Use History                             
          S denies any use of nicotine, alcohol, cannabis, cocaine, heroin, opiates, or
          benzodiazepines.                                   
        E. Social and Developmental History                  
          S has been married for 3 years and is living with her husband, who works as an
          accountant in the local bank. She completed her master’s degree from Baruch
          College and currently works as an accountant at Chase Bank. S was always

=== Page 105 (1 cols) ===
94 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
           a high achiever academically; she graduated at the top of her class in col-
           lege, and performed academically excellently in high school and elementary
           school. She is the youngest child of two children and reported no developmen-
           tal issues. Her family is Anglican and she meditates religiously every Sunday.
          F. Family Relationships, Social Network, and Abuse History
                                                             
           S’s parents have been married for 28 years and own a boating business in
           New Rochelle. The client claimed that she has a close relationship with her
           parents and sister, and remembers her childhood with fond memories of rock
           climbing and family vacations. She denies any kind of domestic violence, or
           past history of abuse or maltreatment.            
         G. Work/Legal/Military History                      
           S works as an accountant at the local Chase Bank. She denies any legal his-
           tory or any pending legal problem, and has no military record.
         H. Family Psychiatric History                       
                                                             
           S reports a history of depression in the family. Her mother’s brother was diag-
           nosed and treated for depression between 2012 and 2015. Her father’s brother
           has a history of polysubstance use disorder and was admitted to the hospital for
           treatment several times without success; he died of a heroin overdose in 2018.
          I. Medical History and Review of Systems           
           1. Vital signs: BP: 90/50; HR: 60; RR: 18; Temp: 97 F; Ht: 5’4”; Wt: 88
              lbs; BMI 15.6 kg/m2.                           
           2. General: Alert, awake, and oriented × 4 to name, place, time, purpose;
              thin body frame, poorly nourished.             
           3. Hair and nail: Brittle.                        
           4. Allergies: No known allergies reported.        
           5. During the interview, S was recommended hospitalization for a thorough
              physical examination and treatment of her eating disorder. However, she
              declined the recommendation and also refused to have a physical exami-
              nation following the interview, other than taking vital signs. Instead, she
              agreed to see her PCP for a full physical examination and consented for
              the APMHN to contact her PCP to obtain a copy of her medical records.
          J. Mental Status Examination                       
           1. Appearance and Behavior: S appeared to be her age, with an extremely
              thin body frame. She had lanugo hair on her face, which is common for a
              person with an eating disorder. Her hygiene was clean, but she was overly
              dressed, wearing four layers of clothing and a big sweater, as she claimed
              that she is cold all the time. During the interview, her overall attitude and
              behavior appeared to be uncomfortable and resistant, and her presenta-
              tion was unpleasant and guarded. However, as the interview progressed,
              she became cooperative and engaged marginally in the conversation.
           2. Mood: Depressed and anxious.                   
           3. Affect: Irritable, easily fatigued, and apathetic.

=== Page 106 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 95
          4. Thought Content and Process: Speech was fluent and articulate, volume
            was soft and monotonous. No thought blocking was noted, and overall
            thought process was linear and logical.          
          5. Perceptual Disturbances: S denied delusions or hallucinations, and
            denied homicidal/suicidal ideations, intention, or plans.
          6. Sensorium, Cognitive, and Intellectual Functioning: Alert and oriented
            × 4. Her concentration was fair and she was able to calculate serial 3s
            from 20 with ease. She was able to spell MEMORY backward. Recent
            and remote memories were intact, and she was able to recall three out of
            three unrelated items (apple, table, and penny) after 1 minute and after 5
            minutes.                                         
        K. Diagnosis and Treatment Plan                      
          1. DSM-5 Diagnosis: Anorexia nervosa.              
          2. Rationale for Diagnostic Impression: According to the DSM-5 (APA,
            2013), the following criteria must be present to diagnose anorexia ner-
            vosa. The client met those criteria, as indicated by the bold symptom
            categories A–F:                                  
        A. Signs and Symptoms:                               
          1. Restriction of energy intake relative to requirements, leading to a
            significant low body weight in the context of age, sex, developmental
            trajectory, and physical health. Significantly low weight is defined as
            weight that is less than minimally normal.       
              The client’s weight dropped from 130 lbs to 88 lbs over 3 years. She
            followed a change in diet pattern with complete avoidance of all foods
            with a high caloric value. She gradually began to skip breakfast and
            would have minimal lunch.                        
          2. Intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, and/or persistent
            behavior that interferes with weight gain, even though at a significantly
            low weight.                                      
              The client eventually developed a morbid fear of looking fat and ugly,
            would use soap water enemas, and would occasionally use laxatives.
          3. Disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight or shape is experi-
            enced, undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or
            persistent lack of recognition of the seriousness of the current low
            body weight.                                     
              The client was hospitalized three times for electrolyte imbalance, but
            was reluctant to elaborate on the reasons for the past hospitalizations.
        B. Subtype Specifier:                                
            Binge-eating/purging type: During the last 3 months, the individual has
          engaged in recurrent episodes of binge eating or purging behaviors.
            At times, the client would hide and eat, and/or would secretly go into the
          bathroom and induce vomiting.                      
        C. Current Severity Specifier:                       
            The minimum level of severity for adults is based on current body mass
          index: mild (≥17.0 kg/m2 BMI), moderate (16–16.99 kg/m2 BMI), severe
          (15–15.99 kg/m2 BMI), and extreme (<15 kg/m2 BMI).

=== Page 107 (1 cols) ===
96 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
             The client is 5’4” in height and weighs (fully clothed with four layers and
           a heavy sweater) 88 lbs. Minus the weight of the clothes (3–4 lbs), her actual
           weight is 84 or 85 lbs (BMI: 15.6), which indicates the current severity speci-
           fier for this client is “severe.”                 
             The APMHN concluded that the client met the DSM-5 diagnostic cri-
           teria as addressed above for anorexia nervosa, binge-eating/purging type,
           severe.                                           
           3. Treatment Plan and Summary:                    
             Based on the severity of the client’s symptoms, the APMHN recom-
           mended that she first be admitted to an inpatient medical unit for a full
           diagnostic workup, including pathology and laboratory examination, to be
           stabilized medically first, and then referred for outpatient treatment for an
           eating disorder. The client declined the recommendation, but agreed to see
           her PCP for the workup.                           
             Individuals with anorexia nervosa who are 20% below the expected
           weight for their height are recommended for inpatient programs; those who
           are 30% below their expected weight require psychiatric hospitalization for
           2–6 months (Sadock et al., 2019). This client’s expected weight for her height
           (5’4”) is 107 lbs, but her current weight without clothes is approximately 84
           lbs, which is 20% below her expected weight and warrants an inpatient pro-
           gram. The first consideration in the treatment of anorexia nervosa is to restore
           the client’s nutritional state, and in her present state of mind the client cannot
           take care of herself, especially in terms of her needed dietary intake. A family
           meeting with the husband will be held to discuss the options for the client’s
           treatment plan and to provide education related to eating disorders and their
           impact on overall physical and mental health, with suitable recommendations
           for the client’s current condition.               
         Section 8: Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
                                                             
         Substance-related and addictive disorders cause significant disabilities and
         affect multiple areas of functioning for a relatively high percentage of the popu-
         lation. Lipari and Van Horn (2017) reported that in 2014, approximately 20.2
         million adults aged 18 or older had a past year substance use disorder, 16.3
         million had an alcohol use disorder (AUD), and 6.2 million had an illicit drug
         use disorder (DUD), with an estimated 2.3 million adults having both an AUD
         and an illicit DUD in the previous year. A November 2015 National Institutes
         of Health (NIH) news release reported that a series of national epidemiological
         surveys on alcohol and related conditions found that DUD was more common
         among men, white and Native American individuals, and those who are single
         or no longer married. The surveys also reported that people with DUD were sig-
         nificantly more likely to have a broad range of psychiatric disorders, including
         mood, anxiety, PTSD, and personality disorders. Individuals with a DUD in the

=== Page 108 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 97
       past year were 1.3 times as likely to experience clinical depression, 1.6 times
       as likely to have PTSD, and 1.8 times as likely to have borderline personality
       disorder than people without a DUD. Approximately 4% of Americans met the
       criteria for DUD in the previous year and about 10% have had DUD at some
       time in their lives (NIH, 2015).                      
         Furthermore, according to the 2019 National Survey on Drug Use and Health
       (NSDUH), 14.5 million people ages 12 and older (5.3% of this age group) had
       AUD: 9.0 million men (6.8% of men in this age group) and 5.5 million women
       (3.9% of women in this age group). An estimated 95,000 people (approximately
       68,000 men and 27,000 women) die from alcohol-related causes annually, mak-
       ing alcohol the third-leading preventable cause of death in the United States,
       after tobacco and poor diet/physical inactivity, respectively. Between 2011 and
       2015, the leading causes of alcohol-attributable deaths due to chronic condi-
       tions in the United States were alcohol-associated liver disease, heart disease
       and stroke, unspecified liver cirrhosis, upper aerodigestive tract cancers, liver
       cancer, supraventricular cardiac dysrhythmia, breast cancer, and hyperten-
       sion. In 2019, alcohol-impaired driving fatalities accounted for 10,142 deaths
       (28.0% of overall driving fatalities) (National Institutes of Alcohol Abuse and
       Alcoholism, 2021).                                    
         The DSM-5 eliminated the terms “abuse” and “dependence” that had been
       used in previous editions. Instead, it now uses a single disorder, which is rated
       by severity (mild, moderate, and severe; see Diagnostic Specifier below),
       depending on the number of symptoms met; individuals must meet at least two
       out of the listed symptoms within a 12-month period to be diagnosed with an
       SUD. Overall, the diagnosis of an SUD is based on a pathological pattern of
       behaviors, described below, which are related to use of the substance; each
       diagnosis, in turn, is associated with a substance class. There are ten classes of
       substances: (1) alcohol, (2) caffeine, (3) cannabis, (4) hallucinogens, (5) inhal-
       ants, (6) opioids, (7) sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics, (8) stimulants, (9)
       tobacco, and (10) other (or unknown). In addition, the DSM-5 includes sub-
       stance-induced disorders, such as intoxication and withdrawal. And other sub-
       stance-/medication-induced mental disorders should always be considered in
       the evaluation of depression, anxiety, or psychosis, as underlying substance use
       is often present when psychiatric disorders do not respond to usual treatments
       (APA, 2013).                                          
         Overall, the diagnosis of an SUD is based on a pathological pattern of behav-
       iors related to use of the substance. Table 2.19 presents the diagnostic criteria of
       SUD and the related pathological patterns of symptoms and behaviors under each
       criterion.                                            
         In addition to the diagnostic evaluation of substance-related disorders, there
       are many theories of the neurobiological basis of addiction resulting from the
       pathological hypersensitization of both drug-associated stimuli and drug-induced
       effects. Box 2.8 presents a summary of neurobiological theories of substance-
       related disorders, using alcohol as an example.

=== Page 109 (1 cols) ===
98 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation              
                                                             
         Table 2.19 Diagnostic Criteria of Pathological Pattern of Symptoms and Behaviors
               Related to Substance Use Disorder             
         Criteria    Criterion Pathological Symptoms and Behaviors
         1. Impaired control 1 Consumes the substance in a larger amount or over a
          over substance use longer period than originally intended
                     2    Persistent desire to cut down or regulate substance
                           use, and may report multiple unsuccessful efforts to
                           decrease or discontinue it        
                     3    Spends a great deal of time obtaining the substance,
                           using the substance, or recovering from its effects
                     4    Cravings which manifest as an intense desire or urge
                           for the substance and which may occur at any time
                           but are more likely to occur when in an environment
                           where the substance was previously obtained or
                           used                              
         2. Social impairment 5 Failure to fulfill major role obligations at work, school,
                           or home                           
                     6    Continued substance use despite having persistent or
                           recurrent social or interpersonal problems
                     7    Withdrawal from family activities and hobbies to use
                           substance                         
         3. Risky use of the 8 Recurrent substance use in situations in which it is
          substance        physically hazardous              
                     9    Continued substance use despite knowledge of having
                           a persistent or recurrent physical or psychological
                           problem that is likely to have been caused or
                           exacerbated by the substance      
         4. Pharmacological 10 Tolerance signaled by requiring a markedly increased
          criteria         dose of the substance to achieve the desired effect or
                           by a markedly reduced effect when the usual dose is
                           consumed                          
                     11   Withdrawal syndrome occurs when the concentrations
                           of a substance decline in the body of an individual
                           who had maintained prolonged heavy use of the
                           substance; as a result, the individual is likely to
                           consume the substance to relieve the symptoms
         Source; Adapted from DSM-5, APA (2013).             
          Box 2.8 Neurobiological Bases of Substance-Related Disorders
          Addiction is a psychiatric disorder. While there are many theories about the
          interactions between the neurobiological mechanisms of aberrant learning
          and memory behavior, it is strongly argued that addiction results from the
          pathological hypersensitization of both drug-associated stimuli and drug-
          induced effects. One pathway important to understanding the effects of
          drugs on the brain is called the reward pathway, which involves several

=== Page 110 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 99
                                                             
         parts of the brain: the ventral tegmental area (VTA), the nucleus accumbens
         (NA), and the prefrontal cortex.                    
           For example, alcohol enhances dopamine release from the VTA to the
         NA and reduces glutamate excitotoxicity in the VTA. The positive reinforc-
         ing action of alcohol comes from the activation of the dopaminergic reward
         pathway in the limbic system:                       
         1. When alcohol is consumed, dopamine is released in the VTA and pro-
            jected to the NA, where it is acutely involved in motivation and rein-
            forcement behaviors (alcohol craving).           
         2. Glutamate is the brain’s major excitatory neurotransmitter system;
            alcohol reduces glutamate levels in the NA and suppresses glutamate-
            mediated signal transmission in the central nucleus of the amygdala.
         3. Alcohol enhances dopamine release directly and indirectly through its
            interactions with GABAergic neurons and opioid receptors in the NAs.
         4. GABA is the brain’s major inhibitory neurotransmitter; alcohol
            enhances dopamine release from the VTA to the NA by disinhibiting
            GABA via endogenous opioids. The release of dopamine mediates
            alcohol’s pleasurable and reinforcing actions.   
         5. Opioid systems involving endogenous opioids influence drinking
            behaviors via interaction with the mesolimbic system. Naltrexone is
            an opiate receptor antagonist that has been shown to limit cravings by
            reducing the positive reinforcement effect of alcohol consumption.
         6. Psychologically, alcohol-seeking behavior is exacerbated by changes
            in the PFC, the region of the brain where decision-making and inhibi-
            tory control are governed.                       
         7. Chronic exposure to alcohol progressively manipulates the PFC
            until decision-making and judging the consequences of one’s actions
            become difficult.                                
         Alcohol-Related Brain Involvement                   
         The following key areas of the brain exhibit key neurofunctional abnormali-
         ties due to alcohol consumption:                    
                                                             
         1. Frontal lobes: Executive function, impaired judgment, impulsivity,
            blunted affect.                                  
         2. Hippocampus, thalamus/hypothalamus, and caudate callosum: Memory
            dysfunction.                                     
         3. Corpus callosum: Visuospatial abilities.         
         4. Corpus callosum and cerebellum: Upper and lower limb control.
         5. Pons and cerebellum: Oculomotor control.         
                                   (Adapted from Stahl, 2013)

=== Page 111 (1 cols) ===
100 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
         In this section, alcohol-related disorders are chosen as an example of how to con-
         duct a mental status assessment and diagnostic evaluation, as they represent the
         classic condition in this group of disorders.       
                                                             
         Diagnostic Criteria                                 
         DSM-5 Alcohol-Related Disorders Diagnostic Criteria Modified
                                                             
         The DSM-5 classifies alcohol-related disorders as (1) alcohol use disorder, (2)
         alcohol intoxication, (3) alcohol withdrawal, (4) other alcohol-induced disorder,
         and (5) unspecified alcohol-related disorder. Only alcohol use disorder, alcohol
         intoxication, and alcohol withdrawal are covered in this section, as other alcohol-
         induced disorder and unspecified alcohol-related disorder do not meet the full
         criteria for any specific alcohol-related disorder. 
          1. Alcohol use disorder diagnostic criteria        
                                                             
         A. Signs and Symptoms: A pattern of alcohol use leading to clinically significant
           impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following:
           1. Alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period of time
              than intended.                                 
           2. A persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down on or control alco-
              hol use.                                       
           3. A great deal of time is spent on activities necessary to obtain alcohol, use
              alcohol, or recover from its effects.          
           4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol.
           5. Recurrent alcohol use that results in a failure to fulfill major role obliga-
              tions at work, school, or home.                
           6. Continued alcohol use despite having persistent or recurrent social or
              interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by its effects.
           7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
              reduced because of alcohol use.                
           8. Recurrent alcohol use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
           9. Continued alcohol use despite knowledge of having a persistent or recur-
              rent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused
              or exacerbated by alcohol.                     
           10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
              a. A need for markedly increased amounts of alcohol to achieve intoxi-
                cation or the desired effect.                
              b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same
                amount of alcohol.                           
           11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
              a. Characteristic withdrawal syndrome for alcohol (see the alcohol
                withdrawal diagnostic criteria listed below).
              b. Alcohol is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.

=== Page 112 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 101
        2. Alcohol intoxication diagnostic criteria          
                                                             
          A. Recent ingestion of alcohol.                    
          B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes
            (e.g., inappropriate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability,
            impaired judgment, impaired social or occupational functioning) that
            develop during, or shortly after, ingestion of alcohol.
          C. Signs and Symptoms: One or more of the following signs or symptoms
            developing during or shortly after alcohol ingestion:
            1. Slurred speech.                               
            2. Incoordination.                               
            3. Unsteady gait.                                
            4. Nystagmus.                                    
            5. Impairment in attention or memory.            
            6. Stupor or coma.                               
          D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condi-
            tion (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis) and are not better explained by another
            mental disorder (e.g., delirium), including intoxication with another sub-
            stance (e.g., benzodiazepines).                  
          E. Associated Features Supporting Alcohol Intoxication Diagnosis:
            Alcohol intoxication is sometimes associated with amnesia of the events
            that occurred during the course of the intoxication (“blackouts”).
          F. Coding Note: Coding for alcohol intoxication depends on whether there
            is a comorbid alcohol use disorder. If alcohol use disorder is comorbid,
            severity specifiers (mild, moderate, or severe) are required.
        3. Alcohol withdrawal diagnostic criteria            
          A. Cessation of (or reduction) in alcohol use that has been heavy and
            prolonged.                                       
          B. Signs and Symptoms: Two (or more) of the following symptoms devel-
            oping within several hours to a few days after cessation of (or reduction
            in) alcohol use:                                 
            1. Autonomic hyperactivity (e.g., sweating or pulse rate greater than
               100 bpm).                                     
            2. Increased hand tremor.                        
            3. Insomnia.                                     
            4. Nausea or vomiting.                           
            5. Transient visual, tactile, or auditory hallucinations or illusions.
            6. Psychomotor agitation.                        
            7. Anxiety.                                      
            8. Generalized tonic-clonic seizures.

=== Page 113 (1 cols) ===
102 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
           C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B lead to clinically significant dis-
              tress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of
              functioning.                                   
           D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition
              and are not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxi-
              cation or withdrawal from another substance.   
           E. Diagnostic Specifier:                          
             With perceptual disturbances: This specifier applies when hallucinations
           (usually visual or tactile) occur with intact reality testing, or when auditory,
           visual, or tactile illusions occur in the absence of delirium.
             Current severity:                               
              Mild: Presence of two or three symptoms.       
              Moderate: Presence of four or five symptoms.   
              Severe: Presence of six or more symptoms.      
           F. Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis: Alcohol withdrawal
              delirium tremens with symptoms of altered consciousness, confusion,
              agitation, cognitive impairment, and visual, tactile, and, rarely, auditory
              hallucinations.                                
           G. Coding Note: Alcohol withdrawal can only occur in the presence of a
              moderate or severe alcohol use disorder. Therefore, it is not permissible
              to code a comorbid mild alcohol use disorder with alcohol withdrawal.
                                                             
         Interviewing Techniques in Assessment of Alcohol Use Disorder
         The following samples of diagnostic interview questions are provided as guide-
         lines to help the APMHN to elicit the symptoms of alcohol use disorder and alco-
         hol intoxication during the initial client psychiatric evaluation. Each question is
         outlined based on the diagnostic criteria following the client’s clinical presenta-
         tion, information obtained from others, and the clinician’s observations (adopted
         from NIH–NIAAA, December, 2020).                    
                                                             
         1. Alcohol Use Disorder Diagnostic Criteria         
         A. Signs and Symptoms: A problematic pattern of alcohol use leading to clinically
         significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following:
                                                             
          1. Alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was
           intended.                                         
             Question: In the past year, have you had times when you ended up drink-
           ing more, or longer, than you intended?           
          2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful effort to cut down on or control
           alcohol use.                                      
             Question: In the past year, have you more than once wanted to cut down
           on or to stop drinking, or tried to do so but couldn’t?

=== Page 114 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 103
        3. A great deal of time is spent on activities necessary to obtain alcohol, use
          alcohol, or recover from its effects.              
            Question: In the past year, have you spent a lot of time drinking? Or being
          sick or getting over the aftereffects of drinking? 
        4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol.
            Question: In the past year, have you wanted a drink so badly you couldn’t
          think of anything else?                            
        5. Recurrent alcohol use that results in failure to fulfill major role obligations at
          work, school, or home.                             
            Question: In the past year, have you found that drinking—or being sick
          from drinking—often interfered with taking care of your home or family? Or
          caused job troubles? Or school problems?           
        6. Continued alcohol use despite having persistent or recurrent social or inter-
          personal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of alcohol.
            Question: In the past year, have you continued to drink even though it was
          causing trouble with your family or friends?       
        7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
          reduced because of alcohol use.                    
            Question: In the past year, have you given up or cut back on activities that
          were important or interesting to you, or that gave you pleasure, in order to
          drink?                                             
        8. Recurrent alcohol use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
            Question: In the past year, have you more than once gotten into situations
          while or after drinking that increased your chances of getting hurt (such as
          driving, swimming, using machinery, walking in a dangerous area, or having
          unprotected sex)?                                  
        9. Alcohol use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recur-
          rent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or
          exacerbated by alcohol.                            
            Question: In the past year, have you continued to drink even though it was
          making you feel depressed or anxious or adding to another health problem?
          Or after having had a memory blackout?             
        10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
          a. A need for markedly increased amounts of alcohol to achieve intoxica-
            tion or the desired effect.                      
          b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
            alcohol.                                         
              Question: In the past year, have you had to drink more than you once
            did to get the effect you want? Or have you found that your usual number
            of drinks had much less of an effect than before?
        11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
          a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for alcohol (see alcohol with-
            drawal diagnostic criteria).                     
          b. Alcohol is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.

=== Page 115 (1 cols) ===
104 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
             Question: In the past year, have you found that when the effects of alcohol
           were wearing off, you had withdrawal symptoms, such as trouble sleeping,
           shakiness, restlessness, nausea, sweating, a racing heart, or a seizure? Or
           sensed things that were not there?                
                                                             
         2. Alcohol Intoxication Diagnostic Criteria         
          1. Recent ingestion of alcohol:                    
             Question: When was the last time you had a drink and how much was it?
          2. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes:
             Information obtained from others: The husband reported the client’s ina-
           bility to care for herself and children, marital problems, anxiety disorder.
                                                             
         A. Signs and Symptoms: One or more of the following signs or symptoms
           developing during or shortly after alcohol use:   
           1. Slurred speech.                                
           2. Incoordination.                                
           3. Unsteady gait.                                 
           4. Nystagmus.                                     
           5. Impairment in attention or memory.             
           6. Stupor or coma.                                
         The following presents a case exemplar of the initial psychiatric evaluation,
         including how the diagnosis of alcohol intoxication with comorbid alcohol use
         disorder is determined, along with rationales.      
                                                             
         Case Exemplar                                       
         A. Identification, Chief Complaint, and Reason for Referral
                                                             
           The client is a 57-year-old white, married female brought to the ER by the
           emergency medical services (EMS). She was accompanied by her husband,
           who found her face down on the front deck of the house when he came home
           from work. Upon arrival at the hospital, she appeared to be lethargic, disori-
           ented, and to have slurred speech, but responded when her name was called.
           When she was asked what brought her to the hospital, she said, “I have been
           drinking.”                                        
         B. History of Present Illness                       
           The client reported that for the last several months, she has been suffering from
           insomnia, awakening frequently during the night, and has had a poor appetite,
           resulting in a 35 lb weight loss in 3 months. She was vague about her drinking
           patterns prior to experiencing these symptoms, but claimed that over the past
           2 weeks, her drinking has increased rapidly from a bottle of wine at night to
           help her sleep to two bottles of wine and a quarter of a 750-mL bottle of vodka
           throughout the day. She was unable to get up most mornings on time to get her-
           self ready to go to work, resulting in frequent lateness to or absence from work.

=== Page 116 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 105
            This morning, prior to arrival to the ER, she had three drinks of vodka
          instead of breakfast before passing out. She was not sure of the exact time
          of her last drink. During the interview, the client was anxious, irritable, had
          difficulty sitting still, and both hands were tremulous, indicating that she is
          transitioning from alcohol intoxication to withdrawal. The APMHN decided
          to admit the client to the intensive care unit (ICU) for observation of poten-
          tially serious alcohol withdrawal and to begin an alcohol detoxification regi-
          men intervention. Additional pertinent information was obtained from the
          client’s husband, and the client will be followed up the next day for additional
          information while in the hospital.                 
        C. Past Psychiatric History                          
          According to the client’s husband, the client has a history of depression,
          anxiety, and alcohol use disorder, dating back 30 years. For 2 years, she was
          treated effectively with sedatives, antidepressants, and biweekly psychother-
          apy, but she stopped both the medications and therapy 2 years ago. Since
          then, she has had a long period of social drinking. Over the last year, her
          drinking has increased from an average of eight or nine drinks per week to
          one or two bottles of wine and at least four drinks of vodka a day. Three
          months ago, she was admitted to the hospital ICU for 3 days due to a fainting
          episode following heavy drinking, and against medical advice she discharged
          herself. Since then, she has resumed drinking and has refused to get any help,
          claiming that she could control her drinking by cutting down. The client has
          no history of alcohol-related delirium, seizures, or hallucinations, but has had
          several “blackout” episodes. She has no history of psychiatric hospitaliza-
          tion, and no past history of suicidal gestures or attempts.
            The following information is obtained from the second interview, which
          was conducted the next day in the ICU.             
        D. Substance Use History                             
          The client reported:                               
          1. A history of using marijuana on a weekly basis for about 5 years in her
            early 20s.                                       
          2. Using cocaine once when she was in high school. 
          3. Smoking half a pack of cigarettes a day for the last 30 years.
          4. Beginning to drink alcohol socially at the age of 17, when she went out
            with friends, and her drinking increased in her 20s. She has had signifi-
            cant alcohol intake in the past year and required a brief admission to the
            ICU for stabilization. She has had a persistent desire to cut down but has
            been unsuccessful, as her cravings for alcohol are so powerful that each
            time she tried to stop she always gave in. She denies other substance use.
        E. Psychosocial and Developmental History            
          1. Education: The client has an associate’s degree in liberal science.
          2. Family Relationships, Social Network, and Abuse History: The client is
            an only child. Both parents are alive, but she is estranged from them due

=== Page 117 (1 cols) ===
106 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
              to her drinking issues. She is married with no children. Marital conflict
              due to her drinking has progressively worsened; for the last month, she
              and her husband have been sleeping in separate rooms. She stated that
              her husband has been very supportive and patient with her until now and
              told her that he did not want to be with her unless she got help. She has
              lost most of her close friends, including her drinking partners, since her
              drinking got out of control. No abuse or maltreatment history reported.
           3. Employment Record: The client works as a teacher’s aide at an elemen-
              tary school. As of now, her work is in jeopardy due to her frequent late-
              ness and absences.                             
           4. Legal Record: No legal issues reported. She claimed that she never got a
              DWI (driving while intoxicated).               
           5. Religious Background: The client reported that she is not religious, but
              was raised Catholic.                           
          F. Family Mental Health History                    
           Father has a history of substance use, mostly alcohol, but stopped drinking 10
           years ago when he was threatened by her mother, who filed for divorce. No
           known psychiatric illness and treatment reported. 
         G. Review of Systems                                
           See the medical record, as the client has been undergoing a full medical
           workup, including laboratory tests. She has started a detoxification regimen
           with librium and additional supplements: folic acid 1 mg po daily and thia-
           mine 100 mg po daily. During the interview, she exhibited no visual signs of
           distress, including no symptoms of alcohol withdrawal, and appeared to be
           responding well to the detoxification regimen.    
         H. Mental Status Examination                        
                                                             
           1. Appearance and Behavior: The client appeared to be the stated age, wearing
              a hospital gown. She was cooperative with the interview, making good eye
              contact, occasionally became tearful while talking about her past histories.
           2. Mood: Sad and depressed.                       
           3. Affect: Guarded, tearful, and constricted.     
           4. Thought Content and Process: Speech: Soft tone of voice, rate and vol-
              ume within normal limits, and goal directed. Thought process: Rational
              and logical; no looseness of associations, tangential thoughts, or thought
              blocking. No evidence of delusional thoughts.  
           5. Perceptual Disturbances: She denies auditory/visual/tactile hallucina-
              tions, or illusions.                           
           6. Sensorium, Cognitive, and Intellectual Functioning: Alert and oriented ×
              3. She is fully aware of her drinking problem and its impact on her life,
              and is seriously considering getting help after discharge from the hospital.
          I. Diagnosis and Treatment Plan                    
           1. DSM-5 Diagnosis: Alcohol intoxication, alcohol use disorder.

=== Page 118 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 107
          2. Rationale for Diagnostic Impression: According to the DSM-5 (APA,
            2013), the following criteria must be present to diagnose alcohol intoxi-
            cation. The client meets those criteria, as indicated by the bold symptom
            categories and the client’s clinical presentations:
        A. Recent ingestion of alcohol. The client drank “three drinks of vodka”
          instead of having breakfast this morning, and then passed out.
        B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes. As
          a result of her drinking, she has suffered with depression and anxiety, and her
          marriage and job are in serious trouble.           
        C. Signs and Symptoms: One or more of the following signs or symptoms
          developing during or shortly after alcohol use:    
          1. Slurred speech.                                 
          2. Incoordination.                                 
          3. Unsteady gait.                                  
          4. Nystagmus.                                      
          5. Impairment in attention or memory.              
          6. Stupor or coma.                                 
              Prior to visiting the hospital ER, the client was found unconscious by
            her husband. At the time of the first interview, the client presented with
            symptoms of lethargy, unsteady gait, disorientation, and slurred speech
            (Criteria C1, 2, 5, and 6).                      
        D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition
          and are not better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxica-
          tion with another substance. The client and the husband denied that the cli-
          ent had been diagnosed with any medical or psychiatric conditions, and also
          denied that she was abusing any other substances.  
        E. Associated Features Supporting Alcohol Intoxication Diagnosis: Alcohol
          intoxication is sometimes associated with amnesia of the events that occurred
          during the course of the intoxication (“blackouts”). The client admitted expe-
          riencing blackouts.                                
        F. Coding Note: Coding for alcohol intoxication depends on whether there is a
          comorbid alcohol use disorder. If there is, severity specifiers (mild, moderate,
          or severe) are required.                           
       In addition to alcohol intoxication, the client also meets the diagnostic criteria of
       alcohol use disorder, as indicated below by the bold symptom categories and the
       associated client’s clinical presentations.           
        A. Signs and Symptoms: A problematic pattern of alcohol use leading to clini-
          cally significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the
          following:                                         
          1. Alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was
            intended.                                        
              The client’s social drinking of alcohol started at the age of 17,
            when she went out with friends, and increased in her 20s. She has had

=== Page 119 (1 cols) ===
108 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
              significant alcohol intake in the past year and required a brief admission
              to the ICU for stabilization.                  
           2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down on or
              control alcohol use.                           
               The client has had the persistent desire to cut down on her drinking
              but has been unsuccessful.                     
           3. A great deal of time is spent on activities necessary to obtain alcohol, use
              alcohol, or recover from its effects.          
           4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol.
               The client’s cravings for alcohol are so powerful that each time she
              tried to stop she always gave in.              
           5. Recurrent alcohol use, resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obliga-
              tions at work, school, or home.                
               The client’s job is in jeopardy due to her frequent lateness and
              absences as a result of her drinking.          
           6. Continued alcohol use despite persistent or recurrent social or interper-
              sonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of alcohol.
               The client’s marriage has been in jeopardy, as her husband gave her
              an ultimatum whether to get help or to separate. She has lost all of her
              friends and is estranged from her parents due to her drinking issues.
           7. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or
              reduced because of alcohol use.                
           8. Recurrent alcohol use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
               The client minimizes the impact of her alcohol intake on her physical
              health. Laboratory findings and test results are still pending. The client
              admitted several episodes of “blackouts.”      
           9. Alcohol use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or
              recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been
              caused or exacerbated by alcohol.              
               During the second interview, the client showed significant mood dis-
              turbances of sadness, anxiety, and depressed mood, suggesting that her
              drinking exacerbated these symptoms.           
           10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
              a. A need for markedly increased amounts of alcohol to achieve intoxi-
                cation or desired effect.                    
                  The client admitted that her drinking has increased during the
                last year, from an average of eight or nine drinks per week to one or
                two bottles of wine and at least four drinks of vodka a day.
              b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same
                amount of alcohol.                           
           11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
              a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for alcohol (see the alcohol
                withdrawal diagnostic criteria).             
              b. Alcohol is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.

=== Page 120 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 109
        B. Duration: A problematic pattern of alcohol use leading to clinically signifi-
          cant impairment or distress occurring within a 12-month period.
            The client’s drinking increased in her 20s. She has also had a significant
          increase in alcohol intake in the past year and required a brief admission to
          the ICU for stabilization.                         
        C. Current Severity Specifiers:                      
          Mild: Presence of two or three symptoms.           
          Moderate: Presence of four or five symptoms.       
          Severe: Presence of six or more symptoms.          
            The client met a total of 8 out of 11 symptom criteria, which indicates the
               severity specifier of “severe.”               
            Final diagnosis is confirmed as alcohol intoxication with comorbid alco-
          hol use disorder—severe.                           
        3. Treatment Plan and Summary:                       
                                                             
            Treatment Plan:                                  
          ·· Stabilize the client medically while in ICU.    
          ·· Upon discharge from ICU, recommend that the client continues alcohol
            rehabilitation at a designated facility.         
          ·· Since the client has a history of anxiety and depression in addition to
            alcohol use disorder, further evaluation is recommended for comorbid
            psychiatric disorders (e.g., anxiety disorder and depressive disorder) vs.
            alcohol-induced psychiatric disorders.           
       Summary: The client is a 57-year-old white, married female brought to the ER by
       EMS, accompanied by her husband, who found her unconscious and called 911.
       Upon arrival at the hospital, the client appeared to be lethargic, disoriented, with
       slurred speech, but responded when her name was called. The client had a strong
       alcohol breath and the APMHN suspected that she was intoxicated with alcohol.
       As the interview progressed, the APMHN found her to be more alert and able to
       respond to questions, but the client also became anxious and irritable, with bilat-
       eral hand tremors. The APMHN determined that the client was transitioning from
       alcohol intoxication to alcohol withdrawal, as her last drink was approximately
       8 hours ago, and decided to admit the client to the intensive care unit for medical
       evaluation and alcohol detoxification treatment. The next day, the APMHN fol-
       lowed up with the client in the ICU to complete the initial psychiatric evaluation
       and determined a diagnosis of alcohol intoxication with comorbid alcohol use
       disorder—severe.                                      
         As noted earlier, alcohol-related medical complications are the leading causes
       of alcohol-attributable deaths—for example, alcohol-associated liver disease,
       heart disease and stroke, unspecified liver cirrhosis, upper aerodigestive tract
       cancers, liver cancer, supraventricular cardiac dysrhythmia, and hypertension.
       Table 2.20 presents the list of laboratory tests for the APMHN to order to rule out
       each related disease.

=== Page 121 (1 cols) ===
110 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
                                                             
         Table 2.20 Alcohol and Its Medical Complications    
                                                             
         Medical Complication Abnormal Lab Findings of ETOH Use Disorder
         ·· Gastritis or gastric ulcers ··                   
         ·· Pancreatitis ··                                  
         ·· Esophagitis                                      
         ·· Hypertension                                     
         ·· Cardiomyopathy arrhythmias                       
         ·· Alcoholic hepatitis                              
         ·· Liver cirrhosis ··                               
         ·· High risk of cancer in all ··                    
          affected areas ··                                  
                         ··                                  
                         ··                                  
                           Blood alcohol level (>100 mg/dL)  
                           Elevated                          
                           ·· Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)  
                           ·· Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT)
                           ·· Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
                           ·· Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 
                           Elevated amylase                  
                           Low Na (sodium) and K (potassium) 
                           Elevated serum lipids             
                           Elevated uric acid and triglycerides
                           Decreased WBC, granulocyte, and thrombocytopenia
         Section 9: Neurocognitive Disorders                 
         Neurocognitive disorders (NCDs) are unique among DSM-5 categories in that
         there are NCD syndromes (e.g., major, mild), as well as NCDs due to underlying
         disease entities (e.g., NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease [AD]) (APA, 2013). Sadock
         et al. (2019) classify major NCDs into one of three conditions: (1) delirium, (2)
         dementia, and (3) other cognitive disorders. However, the DSM-5 no longer uses
         the term “dementia” as a diagnosis, but instead uses NCD with etiological sub-
         types (e.g., AD, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, Lewy body disease, and vas-
         cular disease). All criteria for NCDs are based upon defined cognitive domains.
          Delirium develops over a short period of time (usually hours to a few days) with
         acute onset of fluctuating cognitive impairment, and a disturbance of conscious-
         ness. Delirium is a syndrome, not a disease. It is a common disorder among the
         elderly (13% in the general population age 85 years and older). The highest rate
         of hospital-based delirium is found in post-cardiotomy patients (more than 90%
         in some studies); in addition, approximately 30% of open-heart surgery patients,
         20% of severe burn patients, and 30–40% of hospitalized patients with acquired
         immune deficiency syndrome were reported to have delirium (Sadock et al., 2019).
          The prevalence of moderate to severe NCD with etiological subtypes is approx-
         imately 5% in the general population older than 65 years of age, and 20–40% in
         the general population older than 85 years of age. NCD due to AD is the most
         common, accounting for 50–60% of NCDs. It affects as many as 5% of persons
         over age 65, and 15–20% of persons age 85 or older. Risk factors include being
         female and having a first-degree relative with the disorder. There are two types
         of NCD due to AD: early onset (onset before or at age 65) and late onset (onset
         after age 65). Onset is usually initially insidious, and slowly becomes progres-
         sive. After several years, aphasia, apraxia, and agnosia often became apparent,
         and in later stages motor and gait disturbances may develop to the point where the
         person is bedridden. Mean survival is 8 years, with a range from 1 to 20 years;
         the earlier the onset, the longer the mean survival rate. Another common subtype

=== Page 122 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 111
       of NCD is vascular dementia, which is commonly caused by cerebrovascular dis-
       eases and ranges from 0.2% in the 65–70 years age group to 16% in individuals
       80 years and older (Sadock et al., 2019; APA, 2013).  
         NCD with etiological subtypes and delirium have some common features, and
       differentiating between the two diagnoses requires knowing the characteristic
       features of each, as well as establishing the client’s premorbid cognitive status
       by obtaining a client history and conducting cognitive and delirium screens (see
       Table 2.21).                                          
         The core feature of NCDs is acquired cognitive decline in one or more cogni-
       tive domains (see Table 2.22) based on (1) a concern about cognition on the part of
       the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician; and (2) performance
       on an objective assessment that falls below the expected level or that has been
       observed to decline over time. Table 2.22 provides a brief summary of cognitive
       domains and the required symptoms in one (or more) of them to diagnose major
       and mild NCDs (see the DSM-5, pp. 593–595, for more detailed information).
         These cognitive impairments are frequently complicated by behavioral symp-
       toms of disorientation, poor judgment, inability to form an interpersonal relation-
       ship, and lack of problem-solving abilities.          
         Table 2.23 shows the etiological subtype specifier differentiating between
       degenerative and nondegenerative types of NCDs.       
       Table 2.21 Differential Diagnostic Features between NCD with Etiological Subtypes and
             Delirium                                        
       Feature NCD with Etiological Delirium                 
               Subtypes (commonly known                      
               as dementia)                                  
       Onset   Slow and insidious onset                      
       Duration Months to years                              
       Course  Symptoms are progressive                      
                over a long period of time;                  
                not reversible                               
       Alertness Generally normal                            
       Attention Preserved and generally                     
                normal                                       
       Memory  Impaired remote memory                        
       Speech  Difficulty with word finding                  
       Thoughts Difficulty with word finding                 
       Psychomotor ·· Wandering/exit seeking                 
         activity ·· Agitated or withdrawn                   
       Perception Usually absent except NCD                  
                due to Lewy body                             
                              Sudden onset; over hours or days
                              Hours or weeks, but can be longer
                              Short and fluctuating; often worse at night
                                and on waking; usually reversible with
                                treatment of the underlying condition
                              Can fluctuate from hypervigilant to very
                                lethargic                    
                              Impaired or fluctuates, difficulty following
                                conversation                 
                              Impaired recent and immediate memory
                              Incoherent (slow or rapid)     
                              Disorganized, distorted, fragmented
                              ·· Hyperactive delirium: Agitation,
                                restlessness, hallucinations 
                              ·· Hypoactive delirium: Sleepy, slow
                                moving                       
                              ·· Mixed: Alternating features of above
                              Distorted: Illusions, hallucinations,
                                delusions; difficulty distinguishing
                                between reality and misperceptions
       Source: Adapted from Victoria Department of Hospital & Health Services (2021).

=== Page 123 (1 cols) ===
T                                                    
        a                                                    
        b l e 2 . 2 2 N e u r o c o g n i t i v e D o m a i  
        n                                                    
        a n d                                                
        S y m p t                                            
        o                                                    
        m                                                    
        E                                                    
        x                                                    
        a m                                                  
        p l e s                                              
           C                                                 
           o                                                 
           g n i t i v e D o m a i n                         
           S                                                 
           y                                                 
           m                                                 
           p t o                                             
           m E x a m p l e s                                 
             1                                               
             .                                               
             C o m p l e x a t t e n t i o n ( s u s t a i n e d a t t e
             n                                               
             t i o n ,                                       
             d                                               
             i v i d e d                                     
              a t t e n t i o n , s e l e c t i v e a t t e n t i o n , p r o c
              e                                              
              s s i n g                                      
              s p e e d )                                    
                  2                                          
                  .                                          
                  E x e c u t i v e f u n c t i o n ( p l a n n i n g , d e c
                  i                                          
                  s i o n -                                  
                  m a k i n g ,                              
                    w o r k i n g m e m o r y , r e s p o n d i n g t o f
                    e                                        
                    e d b a                                  
                    c                                        
                    k / e r r o r                            
                     c o r r e c t i o n , o v e r r i d i n g h a b i t s / i n h i b
                     i                                       
                     t i o n ,                               
                     m e n t a l                             
                      fl e x i b i l i t y )                 
                        3                                    
                        .                                    
                        L e a r n i n g / m e m o r y ( i m m e d i a t e m e
                        m o r y ,                            
                        r                                    
                        e c e n t                            
                         m e m o r y [ i n c l u d i n g r e c a l l , c u e d r e
                         c                                   
                         a l l , a                           
                         n                                   
                         d                                   
                          r e c o g n i t i o n m e m o r y ] , v e r y - l o n g t
                          e                                  
                          r m m                              
                          e                                  
                          m o r y                            
                            [ s e m a t i c ; a u t o b i o g r a p h i c a l ] , i m p l i
                            c                                
                            i t l e a                        
                            r                                
                            n i n g )                        
                               4                             
                               .                             
                               L a n g u a g e ( e x p r e s s i v e l a n g u a g e [ i
                               n                             
                               c l u d i                     
                               n                             
                               g n a m                       
                               -                             
                                i n g , w o r d fi n d i n g , fl u e n c y , a n d g r
                                a                            
                                m m a                        
                                r                            
                                a n d                        
                                 s y n t a x ] a n d r e c e p t i v e l a n g u a g e )
                                       5                     
                                       .                     
                                       P e r c e p t u a l - m o t o r ( i n c l u d e s a b i l i t i
                                       e                     
                                       s s u b               
                                       s                     
                                       u m e d               
                                        u n d e r t h e t e r m s : v i s u a l p e r c e p t i o n
                                        ,                    
                                        v i s u              
                                        o                    
                                        -                    
                                         c o n s t r u c t i o n a l p e r c e p t u a l - m o t o r ,
                                         p                   
                                         r a x i s           
                                         ,                   
                                         a n d               
                                           g n o s i s )     
                                             6               
                                             .               
                                             S o c i a l c o g n i t i o n ( r e c o g n i t i o n o f e
                                             m o t i o       
                                             n               
                                             s ,             
                                               t h e o r y o f m i n d )
             M                                               
             a                                               
             j                                               
             o r :                                           
             D i ffi c u l t y i n e n v i r o n m e n t s w i t h m u l t i p l e s t i m u l i , h o l d i n g n e w i n f o r m a t i o n , u n a b l e
             t o p                                           
             e r f o r m                                     
              m e n t                                        
              a l c a l c u l a t i o n , a l l t h i n k i n g t a k e s l o n g e r t h a n u s u a l
                M                                            
                i                                            
                n                                            
                o r :                                        
                N o r m a l t a s k s t a k e l o n g e r t h a n p r e v i o u s l y , fi n d i n g e r r o r s i n r o u t i n e t a s k s , n e e d s m o
                r e d                                        
                o u b l e -                                  
                 c                                           
                 h e c                                       
                 k i n g , t h i n k i n g i s e a s i e r w h e n n o t w i t h m u l t i p l e s t i m u l i
                  M                                          
                  a                                          
                  j                                          
                  o r :                                      
                  N e e d s t o f o c u s o n o n e t a s k a t a t i m e , n e e d s t o r e l y o n o t h e r s t o p l a n i n s t r u m e n t a l a
                  c t i v i                                  
                  t i e s o f                                
                    d                                        
                    a i l y                                  
                    l i v i n g o r m a k e d e c i s i o n s
                     M                                       
                     i                                       
                     n                                       
                     o r :                                   
                     R e q u i r e s e x t r a e ff o r t t o c o m p l e t e m u l t i s t a g e p r o j e c t s , o r g a n i z e / p l a n / m a k e d e c i s i o n
                     s , a n                                 
                     d f o l l o                             
                     w                                       
                      s                                      
                      h i f t i                              
                      n g c o n v e r s a t i o n i n s o c i a l s e t t i n g ; d i ffi c u l t y r e s u m i n g a t a s k o n c e i n t e r r u p t e d
                        M                                    
                        a                                    
                        j                                    
                        o r :                                
                        R e p e a t s s e l f w i t h i n t h e s a m e c o n v e r s a t i o n , u n a b l e t o k e e p t r a c k o f s h o r t l i s t o f i t e
                        m s w                                
                        h e n                                
                         s                                   
                         h o p                               
                         p i n g o r o f p l a n s f o r t h e d a y , n e e d s a f r e q u e n t r e m i n d e r t o o r i e n t t o t a s k a t h a n d
                          M                                  
                          i                                  
                          n                                  
                          o r :                              
                          D i ffi c u l t y r e c a l l i n g r e c e n t e v e n t s , r e l i e s o n l i s t m a k i n g o r c a l e n d a r , r e - r e a d i n g t o k
                          e e p t                            
                          r a c k                            
                            o                                
                            f c h                            
                            a r a c t e r s i n a m o v i e o r n o v e l , r e p e a t s s e l f o v e r a f e w w e e k s t o t h e s a m e p e r s o n , l o s
                            e s t r                          
                            a c k o f                        
                             w h e t                         
                             h e r o r n o t b i l l s h a v e a l r e a d y b e e n p a i d
                               M                             
                               a                             
                               j                             
                               o r :                         
                               S i g n i fi c a n t d i ffi c u l t i e s w i t h e x p r e s s i v e o r r e c e p t i v e l a n g u a g e , u s e s g e n e r a l - u s e p h r
                               a s e s                       
                               s u c h a                     
                               s                             
                                “                            
                                t h a t                      
                                t h i n g ” a n d “ y o u k n o w w h a t I m e a n , ” w i t h s e v e r e i m p a i r m e n t m a y n o t r e c a l l n a m
                                e s o f                      
                                c l o s e                    
                                 f                           
                                 r i e n                     
                                 d s a n d f a m i l y ; e c h o l a l i a a n d a u t o m a t i c s p e e c h t y p i c a l l y p r e c e d e m u t i s m
                                   M                         
                                   i                         
                                   n                         
                                   o r :                     
                                   N o t i c e a b l e w o r d - fi n d i n g d i ffi c u l t y ; m a y s u b s t i t u t e g e n e r a l f o r s p e c i fi c t e r m s , a v o i d
                                   u s e                     
                                   o f                       
                                    s                        
                                    p e c i                  
                                    fi c n a m e s o f a c q u a i n t a n c e s , g r a m m a t i c a l e r r o r s i n v o l v i n g s u b t l e o m i s s i o n o r i n c o r
                                    r e c t                  
                                    u s e o f                
                                     a                       
                                     r t i c l               
                                     e s , p r e p o s i t i o n s , a u x i l i a r y v e r b s , e t c .
                                       M                     
                                       a                     
                                       j                     
                                       o r :                 
                                       S i g n i fi c a n t d i ffi c u l t i e s w i t h p r e v i o u s l y f a m i l i a r a c t i v i t i e s , n a v i g a t i n g i n f a m i l i a r e n
                                       v i r o               
                                       n m e n t s           
                                       ,                     
                                        o                    
                                        f t e n              
                                        m o r e c o n f u s e d a t d u s k
                                         M                   
                                         i                   
                                         n                   
                                         o r :               
                                         N e e d s t o r e l y m o r e o n m a p s o r o t h e r s f o r d i r e c t i o n s , u s e s n o t e s a n d f o l l o w s o t h e r s
                                         t o g               
                                         e t t o a           
                                           n                 
                                           e w               
                                           p l a c e , fi n d s s e l f l o s t o r t u r n e d a r o u n d w h e n n o t c o n c e n t r a t i n g o n t a s k , l e s s p r e c i s e
                                           i n p             
                                           a r k i n g ,     
                                            n                
                                            e e d            
                                            s t o e x p e n d g r e a t e r e ff o r t f o r s p a t i a l t a s k s , s u c h a s c a r p e n t r y , a s s e m b l y , s e w i n g , o r
                                            k n i t          
                                            t i n g          
                                              M              
                                              a              
                                              j              
                                              o r :          
                                              B e h a v i o r c l e a r l y o u t o f a c c e p t a b l e s o c i a l r a n g e , f o c u s e s e x c e s s i v e l y o n a t o p i c d e s
                                              p i t e        
                                              g r o u p s    
                                              ’              
                                               d             
                                               i s i n       
                                               t e r e s t o r d i r e c t f e e d b a c k , m a k e s d e c i s i o n s w i t h o u t r e g a r d t o s a f e t y , t y p i c a l l y h a s l i
                                               t t l e i     
                                               n s i g h t   
                                                i            
                                                n t o        
                                                o w n b e h a v i o r s
                                                 M           
                                                 i           
                                                 n           
                                                 o r :       
                                                 S u b t l e c h a n g e s i n b e h a v i o r o r a t t i t u d e , o f t e n d e s c r i b e d a s a c h a n g e i n p e r s o n a l i t y , l
                                                 e s s       
                                                 a b i l i t y
                                                   t         
                                                   o r e     
                                                   c o g n i z e s o c i a l c u e s o r r e a d f a c i a l e x p r e s s i o n s , d e c r e a s e d e m p a t h y , i n c r e a s e d e x t r a
                                                   v e r s i 
                                                   o n o r   
                                                    i        
                                                    n t r o  
                                                    v e r s i o n , d e c r e a s e d i n h i b i t i o n , o r s u b t l e o r e p i s o d i c a p a t h y o r r e s t l e s s n e s s
         112 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation

=== Page 124 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 113
                                                             
       Table 2.23 Etiological Subtype Specifier: Degenerative vs. Nondegenerative Types
                                                             
       Degenerative NCDs    Nondegenerative NCDs             
       Alzheimer’s disease  Vascular disease                 
       Frontotemporal lobar degermation Traumatic brain injury
       Lewy body disease    Substance/medication induced     
       Parkinson’s disease  HIV infection                    
       Huntington’s disease                                  
       Source: Adapted from Sadock et al. (2019).            
         In addition to etiological subtype specifiers, behavioral disturbance is another
       important specifier for a final NCD diagnosis—that is, either with or without
       behavioral disturbance. Specifier: (1) without behavioral disturbance if the cogni-
       tive disturbance is not accompanied by any clinically significant behavioral distur-
       bance, such as psychotic symptoms, mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other
       behavioral symptoms; (2) with behavioral disturbance if the cognitive disturbance
       is accompanied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (APA, 2013).
         NCDs differ from age-associated memory impairment (normal aging), which
       presents as a decreased ability to learn new material, a slowing of thought processes,
       and benign senescent forgetfulness. In addition, memory impairment due to normal
       aging does not show a progressive deteriorating course, as seen in NCDs. Similarly,
       another common psychiatric illness—depression in the elderly—may also present
       as cognitive impairment or as a comorbid illness with NCD. It is therefore criti-
       cally important to conduct a careful assessment with cognitive screening to rule out
       possible treatable causes, as well as to provide a baseline to differentiate whether
       the decline in cognition is due to depression, for example, or to NCD. The most
       commonly used cognitive assessment tools are the Standardized Mini-Mental State
       Examination (SMMSE), the Abbreviated Mental Test Score (AMTS), and the Clock
       Drawing Test (CDT) (Victoria Department of Hospital & Health Services, 2021).
       Diagnostic Criteria                                   
                                                             
       In this section, neurocognitive disorder due to AD is chosen as an example to
       address the diagnostic evaluations of NCDs, as it is the most common cause of
       NCDs and represents the classic condition in this group of disorders.
                                                             
       DSM-5 Criteria for Major or Mild Neurocognitive       
       Disorder due to AD Modified                           
        A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder (see Table 2.24).
        B. There is insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment in one or
          more cognitive domains (see Table 2.22; for major neurocognitive disorder,
          at least two domains must be impaired).            
        C. Criteria are met for either probable or possible AD as shown in Table 2.25.

=== Page 125 (1 cols) ===
114 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
                                                             
         Table 2.24 DSM-5 Modified Diagnostic Criteria for Major and Mild Neurocognitive
               Disorders                                     
           Major Neurocognitive Disorder Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
                                                             
         A. Evidence of significant cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in
             one or more cognitive domains (see Table 2.22) based on A1 and A2:
         A1. Concern of the individual, a Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable
             knowledgeable informant, or the informant, or the clinician that there
             clinician that there has been a has been a mild decline in cognitive
             significant decline in cognitive function; and  
             function; and                                   
         A2. A substantial impairment in cognitive A modest impairment in cognitive
             performance, preferably documented performance, preferably documented by
             by standardized neuropsychological standardized neuropsychological testing
             testing or, in its absence, another or, in its absence, another quantified
             quantified clinical assessment. clinical assessment.
         B. The cognitive deficits interfere The cognitive deficits do not interfere
             with independence in everyday with capacity for independence in
             activities (i.e., at a minimum, everyday activities (i.e., complex
             requiring assistance with complex instrumental activities of daily living,
             instrumental activities of daily living, such as paying bills or managing
             such as paying bills or managing medications are preserved, but greater
             medications).        effort, compensatory strategies, or
                                  accommodations may be required).
         C. The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.
         D. The cognitive deficits are not better explained by a mental disorder (e.g., major
             depressive disorder, schizophrenia).            
         Source: Adapted from DSM-5, APA (2013).             
         D. The disturbance is not better explained by cerebrovascular disease, another
           neurodegenerative disease, the effects of a substance or of another mental,
           neurological, or systemic disorder.               
         Diagnostic note example: “Probable (possible) major (minor) neurocognitive
         disorder due to AD with (without) behavioral disturbance.”
          For early-onset cases with autosomal dominant inheritance, a mutation in one
         of the known causative AD genes—amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1
         (PSEN1), or presenilin 2 (PSEN2)—may be involved, and genetic testing for such
         mutations is commercially available for PSEN1. At present, various biomarkers
         related to AD are identified, but not fully validated, and many are available only
         in tertiary care settings (Sadock et al., 2019).    
          Diagnostic markers for AD are based on the hallmarks of the following patho-
         logical findings and may have diagnostic value:     
          1. Diffuse cortical atrophy and enlarged ventricle detected on CT or MRI, and
           decreased brain acetylcholine metabolism.         
          2. Amyloid-based diagnostic test, such as amyloid imaging or brain positron
           emission tomography scan.

=== Page 126 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 115
                                                             
       Table 2.25 Differentiation between Major and Minor Neurocognitive Disorder due to
             Alzheimer’s disease (AD)                        
       Major Neurocognitive Disorder due to AD Minor Neurocognitive Disorder
                                    due to AD                
       Probable AD is diagnosed if either of the following   
         is present; otherwise, possible AD should be        
         diagnosed:                                          
        1. Evidence of a causative AD genetic mutation from  
          family history or genetic testing; or              
        2. All three of the following are present:           
          a. Clear evidence of decline in memory and         
            learning, and at least one other cognitive       
            domain (based on detailed history or serial      
            neuropsychological testing).                     
          b. Steadily progressive, gradual decline in cog-   
            nition, without extended plateaus.               
          c. No evidence of mixed etiology (i.e., absence    
            of another neurogenerative or cerebrovascu-      
            lar disease, or another neurological, mental,    
            or systematic disease or condition that is       
            likely contributing to cognitive decline).       
                                    Possible AD is diagnosed if all
                                     three of the following are
                                     present:                
                                    Clear evidence of decline in
                                     memory and learning.    
                                    Steadily progressive, gradual
                                     decline in cognition, without
                                     extended plateaus.      
                                    No evidence of mixed     
                                     etiology (i.e., absence of
                                     another neurogenerative or
                                     cerebrovascular disease,
                                     or another neurological 
                                     or systematic disease   
                                     or condition that may   
                                     contribute to cognitive 
                                     decline).               
        3. Reduced levels of amyloid beta-42 in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
          (Table 2.26).                                      
       Table 2.26 Pathological and Clinical Features of Degenerative Neurocognitive Disorders
       Disorder Pathology Clinical Features                  
       Alzheimer’s Amyloid/tau Memory deficit                
         disease  pathology Aphasia                          
                          Apraxia                            
                          Agnosia                            
       NCD with Lewy Alpha-synuclein Memory deficit          
         bodies   pathology Fluctuating attention            
                          Extrapyramidal signs               
                          Psychosis (well-formed and detailed visual
                            hallucinations)                  
       Frontotemporal Tau pathology Memory deficit           
         NCD              Speech/language disorders          
                          Behavioral disinhibition           
                          Hyperorality                       
                          Aphasia or inertia                 
       Huntington’s Trinucleotide Memory deficit             
         disease  repeat  Executive dysfunction              
                          Chorea                             
                                              (Continued)

=== Page 127 (1 cols) ===
116 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
         Table 2.26 Continued                                
                                                             
         Disorder Pathology Clinical Features                
         Prion disease Abnormal isoform                      
                   of a cellular                             
                   glycoprotein                              
                   (Prion protein)                           
         Parkinson’s Alpha-synuclein                         
          disease  pathology                                 
                           Memory deficit                    
                           Ataxia                            
                           Myoclonus                         
                           Language disturbance              
                           Cognitive decline                 
                           Apathy                            
                           Depressed and anxious mood        
                           Hallucinations/delusions          
                           Personality changes               
                           Rapid eye movement sleep behavior 
                           Excessive daytime sleep           
         Source: Adapted from Stahl (2013).                  
         Interviewing Techniques in Assessment of            
         Neurocognitive Disorder due to AD                   
         Six components of a diagnostic evaluation enable the APMHN to obtain the infor-
         mation necessary to assess a client with potential NCD due to AD: (1) interview-
         ing the client to take a history, (2) interviewing a caregiver or family member,
         (3) physical examination, (4) brief cognitive tests, (5) laboratory tests, and (6)
         structural imaging tests, if indicated.             
          The interview process with an individual with NCD due to AD can be challeng-
         ing because one of its hallmark symptoms, along with memory loss, is difficulty
         expressing thoughts (such as in word-finding problems) or in understanding them
         (often called receptive communication). Basic effective communication strategies
         when assessing a client with NCD due to AD for diagnostic evaluation would be
         helpful not only for the clinician but also for the caregiver(s) of the person.
          Engaging in therapeutic communication with respect and genuine warmth is
         a basic rule to increase the odds of successfully engaging in a diagnostic assess-
         ment interview, whether or not the client has an NCD; however, it is even more
         important for a person with NCD due to AD. Heerema (2019) highlighted nine
         tips when talking with a client who may have NCD due to AD:
          1. Don’t Infantilize the Person: Don’t talk down to the person or treat them like an
           infant. Regardless of how much the person with NCD due to AD can or cannot
           understand, treat the person with honor and use a respectful tone of voice.
          2. Use Their Names and Preferred Titles: Learn what the person’s preferred
           name is and use it. Avoid using “honey,” “sweetheart,” or similar terms. You
           may mean it genuinely in affection, but it can also come across as demeaning
           or patronizing.                                   
          3. Use Gentle Touch: Knowing how someone responds to physical touch is
           important. While some people might get defensive if their personal space
           is invaded, many appreciate a gentle touch, such as giving a little pat on the
           shoulder or holding their hand while talking with them. Personal touch is
           important and can be an effective way to communicate that you care.

=== Page 128 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 117
        4. Don’t Just Talk Loudly: Not every person with NCD due to AD has a hear-
          ing impairment and using a loud tone can make the individual feel like you
          are yelling at them. Use a clear, normal tone of voice to start a conversation
          unless the person has a hearing problem. Then adjust the volume as needed.
        5. Don’t Use Slang or Figures of Speech: As NCD due to AD progresses, it can
          become harder for the person to understand what is said to them. For example,
          telling the person with NCD due to AD that it’s “no use crying over spilled
          milk” might result in them looking to see where the milk has spilled, rather
          than understanding the meaning of the proverb. In fact, the proverb interpreta-
          tion test, which asks the test taker to interpret abstract ideas, such as the spilled
          milk reference above, is one way to screen for symptoms of NCD due to AD.
        6. Don’t Ignore the Person: When asking a question to the client with NCD due
          to AD, first give them a chance to respond before turning to the family mem-
          ber or caregiver for an answer. Also, don’t talk about the person as if they’re
          not there. They might understand more than the interviewer gives them credit
          for, so convey the respect by addressing them directly.
        7. Position Yourself at Their Level: Rather than standing up straight and looking
          down at someone who may be seated, bend down to be at their level. This
          might make the interviewer less comfortable physically, but it will facilitate
          a more comfortable and respectful conversation.    
        8. Avoid Interrogating: Limit the questions to a small number, as the interview-
          er’s goal is to provide encouragement during the visit, not to fire endless
          questions at the client that may be difficult to answer and that may potentially
          overwhelm the client.                              
        9. Smile and Make Eye Contact: A genuine smile can reduce the chance of chal-
          lenging behaviors since the client may feel reassured by the interviewer’s
          nonverbal communication. A warm smile and eye contact convey that the
          interviewer is glad to be with the client and are highly important factors in
          therapeutic communications.                        
       The following is a sample case exemplar of the initial psychiatric evaluation of a
       person with NCD, including how the diagnosis of NCD due to AD is determined,
       with the rationales and treatment plan.               
       Case Exemplar                                         
       The client’s initials are KK.                         
                                                             
        A. Identification, Chief Complaint, and Reason for Referral
          KK is a 76-year-old married, Caribbean-American male, referred by his pri-
          mary care provider for a full psychiatric evaluation for potential NCD (demen-
          tia). KK was brought to the clinic by his wife with the chief complaint of, “I
          get confused a lot and I don’t remember where I am at times, and I find it diffi-
          cult to remember if I have paid my bills.” He is alert and oriented to person and
          place, but unable to identify the current date. KK presents with a flat affect, but
          is cooperative with the assessment. Most of the information was received from

=== Page 129 (1 cols) ===
118 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
           his wife, who is his primary caregiver, due to the client’s inability to answer
           most of the questions. A Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE) was con-
           ducted and KK scored 10 out of 30, indicating moderate cognitive impairment.
         B. History of Present Illness                       
                                                             
           KK’s wife reported that KK has had a long period of forgetfulness start-
           ing about a year ago, when he would forget where he placed the keys and
           at times would forget driving directions to the house where they have lived
           for over 30 years. KK periodically asks his wife if they have children and
           grandchildren. He often does not remember the current date and often asks
           about his deceased parents. KK’s spouse reported that he frequently called
           his children by the wrong names, which has been a cause of increased anxiety
           and concern for the family. About 3 weeks ago, KK’s wife went to the store
           for about an hour and upon her return the door of the house was open and the
           water in the kitchen sink was running. KK was found wandering in the streets
           and was brought back by the police. KK did not remember this incident. The
           wife reported that he seemed to have poor impulse control at times when he
           was confused and frustrated, as he would yell and swing his arms. She has
           been feeling unsafe for him and for herself taking care of him at home, as he
           has been requiring constant supervision. During the interview the client was
           calm, verbally responsive and cooperative, behaviorally in control despite
           his difficulty answering various questions and often delayed in his responses.
         C. Past Psychiatric History                         
           KK denied any prior psychiatric illness or related treatment, including outpa-
           tient or inpatient hospitalizations, which was confirmed by his wife.
         D. Substance Use History                            
           KK denies any substance use. He reports having a glass of wine with his dinner
           two or three times a week for the last 20 years. He denies any history of smok-
           ing or any use of illegal drugs. KK’s wife confirmed the given information.
          E. Social and Developmental History                
                                                             
           1. Education: Graduated with a bachelor’s degree, majoring in engineering
              science.                                       
           2. Family Relationships, Social Network, and Abuse History: The client
              is domiciled, married for 45 years, has three children and five grand-
              children. The children and grandchildren visit periodically, and he
              always enjoys being with all his family, especially during the holidays.
              However, over the last year, as his forgetfulness has gotten worse, he has
              become increasingly irritated when the house is full with his children,
              their spouses, and the grandchildren. The client’s wife reported that he
              was a good father to the children and had been very welcoming toward
              the grandchildren when he was well.            
               Socially, he had many social and close friends until his forgetfulness
              began to affect his functions, including driving, going out to various

=== Page 130 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 119
            events, and talking on the phone. At this point, he is no longer able to
            stay connected with people outside of his immediate family. No known
            history of physical, psychological, or sexual abuse reported.
          3. Employment Record and/or Military History: Worked as an engineer for
            the Navy for over 30 years and retired 10 years ago.
          4. Legal Record: No legal issues reported.         
          5. Religious Background: Practicing Anglican.      
        F. Family Psychiatric History                        
          Both parents are deceased. There is no known AD on either the client’s mater-
          nal or paternal side. Also, no known family history of mental illness reported.
                                                             
        G. Review of Systems                                 
          1. Vital signs: BP: 120/80; HR: 70; RR: 20; Temp: 98 F; Ht: 5’10”; Wt: 200
            lbs.                                             
          2. Review of systems showed no significant observable overall physical
            abnormalities; alert and oriented to name and place, but not to date and time.
            ·· No peripheral edema.                          
            ·· Wearing reading glasses, no hearing aid required.
            ·· No tinnitus, vertigo.                         
            ·· No infection at present time reported.        
            ·· No heart or pulmonary problems reported.      
            ·· High blood pressure under control with amlodipine 5 mg daily.
            ·· Hypercholesterolemia under control with simvastatin 20 mg po daily.
          3. Allergies: No known allergies reported.         
          4. Had a physical examination with his PCP a week ago and was reported to
            be “physically healthy” (will obtain a copy of the physical examination).
        H. Mental Status Examination                         
          1. Appearance and Behavior: The client appeared to be the stated age. He
            was noted to stare blankly at times during the interview, but responded
            to questions appropriately with short sentences. His hygiene was fair,
            adequately dressed for the weather.              
          2. Mood: Euthymic.                                 
          3. Affect: Constricted and mood congruent.         
          4. Thought Content and Process: Speech rate and volume were clear but
            delayed response to some questions noted and required repeating of
            some questions before answering. He presented no evidence of loose
            associations, tangential thoughts, or thought blocking.
          5. Perceptual Disturbances: The client denied delusions or paranoia, but
            his wife reported that at times he became suspicious and accusatory
            toward his children, claiming that they were taking advantage of him.
            Denied auditory/visual/tactile hallucinations.   
          6. Sensorium, Cognitive, and Intellectual Functioning: The client is ori-
            ented × 2. He is unable to accurately state the current date and time. His
            insight and judgment were impaired, as the illness has progressed.

=== Page 131 (1 cols) ===
120 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
          I. Diagnosis and Treatment Plan                    
           1. DSM-5 Diagnosis: Possible major NCD due to AD without serious
              behavioral disturbance.                        
           2. Rationale for Diagnostic Impression: In this section, a table format is
              used to present the information (see Table 2.27). This is different from
              the format used for the previous disorders to introduce the APMHN to
              other ways of organizing information when determining the diagnosis.
                                                             
         Diagnostic Assessment and Screening Inventories     
                                                             
          1. The MMSE completed, the client scored 10 out of a maximum 30 points,
           which indicates that he has moderate cognitive impairment. MMSE is not a
           diagnostic instrument but measures the degree of cognitive impairment. The
           scores are generally grouped as follows:          
           ·· 25–30 points: Normal cognition.                
           ·· 21–24 points: Mild cognitive impairment.       
           ·· 10–20 points: Moderate cognitive impairment.   
           ·· 9 points or lower: Severe cognitive impairment.
          2. The Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire (SPMSQ) contains ten ques-
           tions to assess organic brain deficit in elderly clients. KK scored seven errors
           out of ten questions, indicating moderate cognitive impairment. The scores
           are generally grouped as follows:                 
           ·· 0–2 errors: Normal mental functioning.         
           ·· 3–4 errors: Mild cognitive impairment.         
           ·· 5–7 errors: Moderate cognitive impairment.     
           ·· 8 or more errors: Severe cognitive impairment. 
             Other instruments are also available to measure the cognitive, visuospa-
           tial, and functional status of a person who may have suspected NCDs. For
           example:                                          
          3. The Clock Drawing Test is a simple tool that is usually used to determine the
           client’s visuospatial disorganization of time.    
          4. The scales of functional assessment of activities of daily living (ADL) are
           instruments used to evaluate an individual’s functional state in a systematic,
           individualized way. Three scales are currently available: (1) basic activities
           of daily living (BADL); (2) instrumental activities of daily living (IADL);
           and (3) advanced activities of daily living (AADL).
         Final diagnosis is confirmed as possible major NCD due to AD without serious
         behavioral disturbance.                             
          3. Treatment Plan                                  
           ·· Collaborative approach with the PCP and a geriatric specialist for further
              evaluation, including medications and diagnostic markers for AD:

=== Page 132 (1 cols) ===
T                                               
             a                                               
             b                                               
             l                                               
             e                                               
             2                                               
             .                                               
             2                                               
             7                                               
             R                                               
             a                                               
             t                                               
             i                                               
             o n a l e f o r N C                             
             D d                                             
             u e                                             
             t o A D                                         
             D i                                             
             a g n                                           
             o                                               
             s t i c                                         
             C r i t e r i a M                               
             a                                               
             t c                                             
             h i                                             
             n                                               
             g                                               
             w i                                             
             t                                               
             h                                               
             t                                               
             h                                               
             e                                               
             C                                               
             l                                               
             i                                               
             e n t ’ s S y m p t o                           
             m s                                             
               M                                             
               a                                             
               j                                             
               o                                             
               r N e u r o c o g n i                         
               t i v e                                       
               D i                                           
               s o r d e r                                   
               T                                             
               h                                             
               e                                             
               C                                             
               l                                             
               i                                             
               e n t ’ s S y m p t o                         
               m s                                           
                  A                                          
                  .                                          
                  E                                          
                  v                                          
                  i                                          
                  d                                          
                  e                                          
                  n c e o f s i g n i fi                     
                  c a n                                      
                  t c                                        
                  o g n i t i v e                            
                  d                                          
                  e c l i                                    
                  n                                          
                  e f r                                      
                  o                                          
                  m a p r e v i                              
                  o                                          
                  u s                                        
                  l e                                        
                  v e                                        
                  l                                          
                  o                                          
                  f                                          
                   p                                         
                   e                                         
                   r f o r m a n c e i n                     
                   o n e                                     
                   o r                                       
                   m o r e c                                 
                   o g                                       
                   n i t i                                   
                   v                                         
                   e d                                       
                   o                                         
                   m a i n s b a s                           
                   e                                         
                   d                                         
                   o n                                       
                   A                                         
                   1                                         
                    a                                        
                    n                                        
                    d A 2 :                                  
                      A                                      
                      1                                      
                      .                                      
                      C                                      
                      o n c e r n o f t h e                  
                      i n d                                  
                      i v i                                  
                      d u a l , a k                          
                      n                                      
                      o w l                                  
                      e                                      
                      d g e                                  
                      a                                      
                      b l e i n f o r                        
                      m                                      
                      a n                                    
                      t ,                                    
                      o                                      
                      r                                      
                      t                                      
                      h e                                    
                        c l i n i c i a n t h a              
                        t t h                                
                        e r e                                
                        h a s b e e                          
                        n                                    
                        a s i                                
                        g                                    
                        n i fi                               
                        c                                    
                        a n t d e c l i n                    
                        e                                    
                        i                                    
                        n c                                  
                        o g                                  
                        n                                    
                        i t                                  
                        i                                    
                        v                                    
                        e                                    
                         f u n c t i o n ; a n               
                         d                                   
                            A                                
                            2                                
                            .                                
                            A                                
                            s u b s t a n t i a l i          
                            m p a                            
                            i r                              
                            m e n t i n c                    
                            o                                
                            g n i t                          
                            i v                              
                            e p                              
                            e                                
                            r f o r m a n c                  
                            e                                
                            ,                                
                            p                                
                            r e f                            
                            e r                              
                            a                                
                            b l                              
                            y                                
                             d o c u m e n t e d             
                             b y                             
                             s t a                           
                             n d a r d i z                   
                             e d                             
                             n e                             
                             u r                             
                             o p                             
                             s                               
                             y c h o l o g i c               
                             a                               
                             l                               
                             t                               
                             e s t                           
                             i                               
                             n                               
                             g                               
                             o                               
                             r                               
                             ,                               
                             i                               
                             n                               
                               i t s a b s e n c e ,         
                               a n o                         
                               t h e                         
                               r q u a n t i                 
                               fi                            
                               e d c                         
                               l i                           
                               n i c                         
                               a                             
                               l a s s e s s m               
                               e                             
                               n t .                         
                                 B                           
                                 .                           
                                 T                           
                                 h e c o g n i t i v e       
                                 d e fi                      
                                 c i t s                     
                                 i n t e r f e r             
                                 e                           
                                 w i t                       
                                 h                           
                                 i n d                       
                                 e                           
                                 p e n d e n c e             
                                 i                           
                                 n                           
                                 e v                         
                                 e                           
                                 r                           
                                 y                           
                                 d a                         
                                 y                           
                                   a c t i v i t i e s ( i . 
                                   e . , a                   
                                   t a                       
                                   m i n i m u               
                                   m                         
                                   , r e                     
                                   q                         
                                   u i r i                   
                                   n                         
                                   g a s s i s t a n         
                                   c                         
                                   e                         
                                   w i                       
                                   t                         
                                   h                         
                                    c o m p l e x i n s      
                                    t r u                    
                                    m e                      
                                    n t a l a c t i          
                                    v i t                    
                                    i e s                    
                                    o                        
                                    f d                      
                                    a i                      
                                    l y l i v i n g ,        
                                    s                        
                                    u c                      
                                    h                        
                                    a                        
                                    s                        
                                    p                        
                                    a                        
                                    y                        
                                    i                        
                                    n                        
                                    g                        
                                     b i l l s o r m a n     
                                     a g i                   
                                     n g                     
                                     m e d i c a t i         
                                     o                       
                                     n s ) .                 
                                          C                  
                                          .                  
                                          T                  
                                          h e c o g n i t i v e
                                          d e fi             
                                          c i t s            
                                          d o n o t          
                                          o c                
                                          c u r              
                                          e                  
                                          x c l              
                                          u                  
                                          s i v e l y i n t  
                                          h                  
                                          e                  
                                          c o                
                                          n t                
                                          e                  
                                          x t                
                                          o                  
                                          f                  
                                           d e l i r i u m . 
                                            D                
                                            .                
                                            T                
                                            h e c o g n i t i v e
                                            d e fi           
                                            c i t s          
                                            a r e n o t      
                                            b                
                                            e t t e          
                                            r                
                                            e x p            
                                            l                
                                            a i n e d b y a  
                                            m                
                                            e n t            
                                            a l              
                                              d i s o r d e r ( e .
                                              g . ,          
                                              m a j          
                                              o r d e p r e  
                                              s s            
                                              i v e          
                                              d              
                                              i s o          
                                              r              
                                              d e r , s c h i z
                                              o              
                                              p h            
                                              r e            
                                              n              
                                              i a            
                                              )              
                                              .              
                      A                                      
                      1                                      
                      . T h e c l i e n t ’ s                
                      w i f                                  
                      e r e p o r t e                        
                      d t h a                                
                      t                                      
                      t h e                                  
                      c l i e n t ’ s m                      
                      e                                      
                      m                                      
                      o r y a                                
                      n                                      
                      d                                      
                        i n d e p e n d e n t f              
                        u n c                                
                        t i o n s h a v                      
                        e d e t                              
                        e r i o r                            
                        a t e d s i g n i                    
                        fi                                   
                        c a                                  
                        n t l y                              
                        o                                    
                        v                                    
                        e r                                  
                        t                                    
                        h                                    
                        e                                    
                         l a s t y e a r , a n d             
                         i s c                               
                         o n c e r n e d                     
                         a b o                               
                         u                                   
                         t h i s                             
                         s a f e t y a n                     
                         d                                   
                         i                                   
                         n a b i l i                         
                         t                                   
                         y                                   
                         t o                                 
                          c a r e f o r h i m s              
                          e l f                              
                          w i t h o u t f u                  
                          l l s u                            
                          p e r v i                          
                          s i o n .                          
                            A                                
                            2                                
                            . D u r i n g t h e i            
                            n i t i                          
                            a l p s y c h i a                
                            t r i c                          
                            e                                
                            v a l u                          
                            a t i o n , i t w                
                            a                                
                            s                                
                            c o n fi                         
                            r                                
                            m                                
                            e                                
                            d                                
                             t h a t t h e c l i e n t       
                             s h                             
                             o w e d a s u                   
                             b s t a                         
                             n                               
                             t i a l i                       
                             m p a i r m e n                 
                             t                               
                             i                               
                             n h i s                         
                             c                               
                             o                               
                             g n                             
                             i                               
                             t i                             
                             v                               
                             e                               
                               p e r f o r m a n c e ,       
                               b a s                         
                               e d o n t h e                 
                               p e r s                       
                               o n a l                       
                               i n t e r v i e w             
                               e                             
                               v                             
                               a l u a t i                   
                               o                             
                               n                             
                               a                             
                               s                             
                                w e l l a s a n M            
                                M S                          
                                E s c o r e o f              
                                1 0 .                        
                                 T h e c l i e n t ’ s c     
                                 o g n                       
                                 i t i v e i m p             
                                 a i r m                     
                                 e                           
                                 n t l e                     
                                 d h i s w i f e             
                                 t                           
                                 o                           
                                 b e l i e                   
                                 v                           
                                 e                           
                                 t                           
                                 h                           
                                 a t                         
                                 B                           
                                 .                           
                                   i t m a y n o t b e       
                                   s a f                     
                                   e t o l e a v e           
                                   h i m                     
                                   a l o n                   
                                   e , a s e v i d e         
                                   n                         
                                   c                         
                                   e d b y                   
                                   h i                       
                                   s                         
                                    w a n d e r i n g b e    
                                    h a v                    
                                    i o r , h i s i n        
                                    a b i l i                
                                    t                        
                                    y t o                    
                                    p e r f o r m a          
                                    s                        
                                    i                        
                                    m p l e                  
                                    t                        
                                    a s                      
                                    k ,                      
                                     s u c h a s m a k i     
                                     n g a                   
                                     p h o n e c a           
                                     l l o r                 
                                     f o l l o               
                                     w i n g a s i           
                                     m                       
                                     p l                     
                                     e d i r                 
                                     e                       
                                     c t                     
                                     i o                     
                                     n ,                     
                                       a n d h i s r e q u i r
                                       i n g                 
                                       s u p e r v i s i     
                                       o n t                 
                                       o                     
                                       p r e                 
                                       v e n t a n y e       
                                       x                     
                                       p                     
                                       o s u r e             
                                       t                     
                                       o                     
                                       r i                   
                                       s                     
                                       k ,                   
                                        s u c h a s b e i n g
                                        l o s                
                                        t o u t s i d e      
                                        o f t h              
                                        e                    
                                        h o u                
                                        s e .                
                                          N o e v i d e n c e
                                          o f d              
                                          e l i r i u m n    
                                          o t e d            
                                          d u r i n          
                                          g t h e e v a l    
                                          u                  
                                          a t                
                                          i o n .            
                                          C                  
                                          .                  
                                            N o e v i d e n c e
                                            o f              
                                            m e n t a l d i s
                                            o r d e          
                                            r                
                                            s d e t          
                                            e c t e d , i n c l
                                            u                
                                            d                
                                            i n g            
                                            D                
                                            .                
                                              d e p r e s s i o n , p
                                              s y c          
                                              h o s i s , b i p
                                              o l a r        
                                              d              
                                              i s o r        
                                              d e r s .      
                                               (             
                                               C             
                                               o             
                                               n t i         
                                               n u           
                                               e             
                                               d             
                                               )             
                            Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 121

=== Page 133 (1 cols) ===
T                                                
            a                                                
            b                                                
            l                                                
            e                                                
            2                                                
            . 2                                              
            7 ( C o n t i                                    
            n u e d                                          
            )                                                
               P                                             
               r                                             
               o                                             
               b                                             
               a b                                           
               l                                             
               e                                             
               v s . P o s s i                               
               b l e                                         
               M a j o r                                     
               N e u r                                       
               o                                             
               c                                             
               o g n i t                                     
               i v e                                         
               D                                             
               i                                             
               s                                             
               o                                             
               r d e                                         
               r                                             
               d u                                           
               e                                             
               t                                             
               o                                             
               A                                             
               D                                             
               T h e C l                                     
               i e n t ’ s S y m p t o m P r                 
               e s e n t a t                                 
               i o n                                         
                  P                                          
                  r                                          
                  o                                          
                  b                                          
                  a b l                                      
                  e                                          
                  A D i s d i a                              
                  g n o s                                    
                  e d i f                                    
                  e i t h e r                                
                  o                                          
                  f                                          
                  t h e                                      
                  f o l l o                                  
                  w i                                        
                  n                                          
                  g i s                                      
                  p                                          
                  r e                                        
                  s                                          
                  e                                          
                  n t                                        
                  ;                                          
                   o                                         
                   t                                         
                   h e                                       
                   r                                         
                   w                                         
                   i s e , p o s s i                         
                   b l e                                     
                   A D s h                                   
                   o u l d                                   
                   b                                         
                   e                                         
                   d i a g                                   
                   n o s e                                   
                   d                                         
                   :                                         
                       1                                     
                       .                                     
                       E v                                   
                       i                                     
                       d                                     
                       e n c e o f a                         
                       c a u                                 
                       s a t i v e                           
                       A D                                   
                       g                                     
                       e                                     
                       n e t i c                             
                       m u t                                 
                       a                                     
                       t                                     
                       i                                     
                       o                                     
                       n f r                                 
                       o                                     
                       m                                     
                       f                                     
                       a                                     
                       m i                                   
                       l                                     
                       y                                     
                       h                                     
                       i                                     
                       s                                     
                       -                                     
                        t o r                                
                        y                                    
                        o r g e n e t i c                    
                        t e s t                              
                        i n g .                              
                          2                                  
                          .                                  
                          A l                                
                          l                                  
                          t                                  
                          h r e e o f t h                    
                          e f o l                            
                          l o w i n                          
                          g a r e                            
                          p r                                
                          e s e n                            
                          t :                                
                            a .                              
                            C l e a r e v i                  
                            d e n c                          
                            e o f d                          
                            e c l i n                        
                            e                                
                            i                                
                            n m e                            
                            m o r                            
                            y                                
                            a                                
                            n                                
                            d l e                            
                            a                                
                            r                                
                            n i                              
                            n                                
                            g                                
                            ,                                
                            a                                
                            n                                
                            d                                
                            a                                
                            t                                
                             l e a s t o n e                 
                             o t h e                         
                             r c o g                         
                             n i t i v e                     
                             d                               
                             o m a i                         
                             n ( b a                         
                             s                               
                             e                               
                             d                               
                             o n                             
                             d                               
                             e                               
                             t a                             
                             i                               
                             l e                             
                             d                               
                             h                               
                             i                               
                             s                               
                             -                               
                               t o r y o r s e               
                               r i a l                       
                               n e u r o                     
                               p s y c h                     
                               o l                           
                               o g i c                       
                               a l t e s                     
                               t                             
                               i                             
                               n                             
                               g                             
                               ) .                           
                                       b .                   
                                       S t e a d i l y       
                                       p r o g               
                                       r e s s i v           
                                       e , g r a             
                                       d                     
                                       u                     
                                       a l d                 
                                       e c l i n             
                                       e                     
                                       i                     
                                       n                     
                                       c o g                 
                                       n                     
                                       i                     
                                       t i                   
                                       o                     
                                       n ,                   
                                       w                     
                                       i                     
                                       t                     
                                       h                     
                                       -                     
                                        o u t e x t e n      
                                        d e d                
                                        p l a t e a          
                                        u s .                
                                            c .              
                                            N o e v i d e    
                                            n c e            
                                            o f m i          
                                            x e d e t        
                                            i                
                                            o                
                                            l                
                                            o g y            
                                            ( i . e . ,      
                                            a                
                                            b                
                                            s                
                                            e n c            
                                            e                
                                            o f              
                                            o t              
                                            h                
                                            e                
                                            r                
                                              n e u r o g e n
                                              e r a t i      
                                              v e o r        
                                              c e r e b      
                                              r              
                                              o              
                                              v a s c        
                                              u l a r        
                                              d              
                                              i              
                                              s              
                                              e              
                                              a s e ,        
                                              o              
                                              r              
                                              a              
                                              n              
                                              o t            
                                              h              
                                              e              
                                              r              
                                               n e u r o l o g i
                                               c a l ,       
                                               m e n t       
                                               a l , o r     
                                               s             
                                               y             
                                               s t e m       
                                               a t i c       
                                               d             
                                               i             
                                               s             
                                               e             
                                               a s e         
                                               o             
                                               r             
                                               c             
                                               o             
                                               n             
                                               d i           
                                               t             
                                               i             
                                               o             
                                               n             
                                                 l i k e l y c o
                                                 n t r i b   
                                                 u t i n g   
                                                 t o c o     
                                                 g           
                                                 n           
                                                 i           
                                                 t i v e     
                                                 d e c l i   
                                                 n           
                                                 e           
                                                 ) .         
                  P                                          
                  o                                          
                  s                                          
                  s                                          
                  i                                          
                  b l                                        
                  e                                          
                  A D i s d i a                              
                  g n o s e d u n t i l a f u l l            
                  n e u r o l                                
                  o g i c a l e v a l u a t i o n t o r      
                  u l e                                      
                  o u t o                                    
                  t                                          
                  h                                          
                  e                                          
                  r                                          
                   N                                         
                   C                                         
                   D                                         
                   s                                         
                   o r s y s t e                             
                   m a t i c d i s e a s e o r c o           
                   n d i t i o n                             
                   l i k e l y c o n t r i b u t i n g t     
                   o c o                                     
                   g n i t i                                 
                   v                                         
                   e                                         
                     d                                       
                     e                                       
                     c l                                     
                     i                                       
                     n                                       
                     e                                       
                     .                                       
                       1                                     
                       .                                     
                       N                                     
                       o                                     
                       e                                     
                       v i d e n c e                         
                       o f f a m i l y h i s t o r y         
                       o r g e n e                           
                       t i c t e s t i n g ( n o e v i d e   
                       n c e                                 
                       o f f a                               
                       m                                     
                       i                                     
                       l                                     
                       y                                     
                        h i                                  
                        s t                                  
                        o                                    
                        r y ) .                              
                          2                                  
                          .                                  
                          A l                                
                          l                                  
                          t                                  
                          h r e e o f t                      
                          h e f o l l o w i n g a r e p r    
                          e s e n t f                        
                          o r t h i s c l i e n t :          
                            a .                              
                            C l e a r e v                    
                            i d e n c e o f d e c l i n e i  
                            n m e m                          
                            o r y a n d l e a r n i n g ; b a s
                            e d                              
                            o n                              
                             d e t a i l e d                 
                             h i s t o r y , t h e c l i e n t
                             m e t i m                       
                             p a i r m e n t i n c o g n i t i v e
                             d o                             
                             m a i n .                       
                               M a j o r c                   
                               o m p l e x a t t e n t i o n d
                               e fi c i t s                  
                               m a n i f e s t e d b y d i ffi c u l
                               t y i                         
                               n e n v                       
                               i                             
                               -                             
                                r o n m e n t                
                                s w i t h m u l t i p l e s t i
                                m u l i ( a                  
                                g i t a t e d d u r i n g f a m i l y
                                g a t                        
                                h e r i n                    
                                g                            
                                s                            
                                ) ,                          
                                 h o l d i n g               
                                 n e w i n f o r m a t i o n ,
                                 u n a b l e t               
                                 o p e r f o r m m e n t a l c a l
                                 c u l                       
                                 a t i o n                   
                                   ( “ d o n ’ t r           
                                   e m e m b e r w h e r e I 
                                   a m a t t i               
                                   m e s , a n d I fi n d i t d i
                                   ffi c u                   
                                   l t t o                   
                                    r e m e m b              
                                    e r i f I h a v e p a i d m
                                    y b i l l s ”            
                                    ) , a l l t h i n k i n g t a k e s l
                                    o n g                    
                                    e r t h a                
                                    n                        
                                      u s u a l ( d          
                                      e l a y e d r e s p o n s e s d
                                      u r i n g t            
                                      h e i n t e r v i e w ) .
                                       b .                   
                                       S t e a d i l y       
                                       p r o g r e s s i v e , g r a d
                                       u a l d e c l         
                                       i n e i n c o g n i t i o n , w i t h
                                       o u t                 
                                        e x t e n d e        
                                        d p l a t e a u s a r e e v i d
                                        e n c e d b          
                                        y t h e g r a d u a l d e t e r i o
                                        r a t i              
                                        o n o f              
                                          t h e c l i e n    
                                          t ’ s m e m o r y , a ff e c t
                                          i n g h i s        
                                          c o g n i t i v e f u n c t i o n i n
                                          g , s              
                                          o c i a l          
                                          a                  
                                          n                  
                                          d                  
                                           f a m i l i a r   
                                           i n t e r a c t i o n s , a n d a
                                           b i l i t y t     
                                           o c a r e f o r h i m s e l f .
                                            c .              
                                            T h e r e i s    
                                            n o m i x e d e t i o l o g y
                                            o f o t h        
                                            e r m e d i c a l o r m e n t a l
                                            c o n            
                                            d i t i o        
                                            n                
                                            s                
                                              r e p o r t e d
                                              ; h o w e v e r , a f u l l n
                                              e u r o l o g  
                                              i c a l e v a l u a t i o n t o r u l
                                              e o            
                                              u t o t h      
                                              e              
                                              r              
                                               N C D s o     
                                               r s y s t e m a t i c d i s e a s
                                               e i s r e q   
                                               u i r e d t o m a k e a p r o b
                                               a b l         
                                               e A D         
                                                 d i a g n o s i
                                                 s .         
         122 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation

=== Page 134 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 123
            ·· CT or MRI to evaluate diffuse cortical atrophy, enlarged ventricle,
               and decreased brain acetylcholine metabolism. 
            ·· Amyloid-based diagnostic test, such as amyloid imaging on brain
               positron emission tomography scans.           
            ·· Cerebrospinal fluid test to determine any reduced levels of amyloid
               beta-42.                                      
            ·· Genetic testing, if requested by the client and family, for a mutation
               in one of the known causative AD genes: amyloid precursor protein,
               presenilin 1, or presenilin 2. Genetic testing for such mutations is
               available, at least for PSEN1.                
          ·· Referral to social services to coordinate issues relating to patient safety,
            finances, and legal planning.                    
          ·· Recommend that the family seek additional supports and education from
            the local Alzheimer’s Association chapter.       
       Section 10: Personality Disorders                     
                                                             
       A personality disorder is an enduring pattern of inner experience and external
       behavior characterized by inflexible and unhealthy patterns of thinking, feeling,
       and behaving. These experiences and behaviors often deviate markedly from the
       expectations of the individual’s culture, and can lead to unhappiness and impair-
       ment. They manifest in at least two of the following four areas: cognition, affec-
       tivity, interpersonal function, and impulse control. Also, when personality traits
       are rigid and maladaptive, an individual experiences functional impairment or
       subjective stress. The onset of personality disorders usually starts in adolescence
       or early adulthood. Personality disorders include ten distinctively specified disor-
       ders, which are explained in more detail in Table 2.28: (1) paranoid, (2) schizoid,
       (3) schizotypal, (4) histrionic, (5) narcissistic, (6) antisocial, (7) borderline, (8)
       avoidant, (9) dependent, and (10) obsessive-compulsive (Sadock et al., 2019). A
       national epidemiological survey of general population data suggests a prevalence
       of paranoid personality disorder of 4.4%, schizoid personality disorder of 3.1%,
       schizotypal personality disorder of 3.9%, and dependent personality disorder of
       0.6% (APA, 2013). The prevalence of other personality disorders in the general
       population are as follows: antisocial personality disorder is 3% in men and 1%
       in women; borderline personality disorder is about 2%, more common in women
       than in men; histrionic personality disorder is 2–3%; narcissistic personality dis-
       order is less than 1%; obsessive-compulsive personality disorder is 1%; avoid-
       ance personality disorder is 0.05–1% (Sadock et al., 2019).
         The DSM-5 (APA, 2013) groups personality disorders into three clusters and
       one category of personality disorder traits:          
        1. Cluster A. The odd and eccentric cluster, which consists of paranoid, schiz-
          oid, and schizotypal personality disorders. These disorders are characterized
          by the use of fantasy and projection, associated with a tendency toward psy-
          chotic thinking. Cognitive disorganization may be common.

=== Page 135 (1 cols) ===
124 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
                                                             
         Table 2.28 General Characteristics of Specific Personality Disorders
                                                             
         Personality Disorder Essential Diagnostic Features  
         Paranoid   Pervasive distrust and suspiciousness of others, often interpreting
                      their motives as malevolent and, as a result, becoming hostile,
                      irritable, hypersensitive, envious, or angry
         Schizoid   Pervasive pattern of detachment from social relations; an isolated
                      lifestyle and lack of interest in social interaction, with a
                      restricted range of expression of emotions in interpersonal
                      settings                               
         Schizotypal Pervasive pattern of social and interpersonal deficits marked
                      by acute discomfort with, and reduced capacity for, close
                      relationships, as well as by cognitive or perceptual distortions
                      and behavioral eccentricities          
         Histrionic Pervasive and emotionally excessive attention-seeking behaviors
         Narcissistic Pervasive patterns of grandiosity, need for admiration, and lack
                      of empathy                             
         Antisocial Pervasive patterns of disregard for, and violation of, the rights
                      of others, also deceitful and manipulative; this pattern is also
                      referred to as psychopathy or sociopathy
         Borderline Pervasive pattern of instability of interpersonal relationships,
                      self-image, affects, and marked impulsivity
         Avoidant   Pervasive pattern of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and
                      hypersensitivity to negative evaluation
         Dependent  Pervasive and excessive need to be taken care of that leads to
                      submissive and clinging behavior and fears of separation
         Obsessive-compulsive Preoccupation with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and
                      interpersonal control, at the expense of flexibility, openness,
                      and efficiency                         
         Source: Adapted from DSM-5, APA (2013).             
          2. Cluster B. The dramatic, emotional, and erratic cluster, which consists of
           histrionic, narcissistic, antisocial, and borderline personality disorders. These
           disorders are characterized by symptoms of dissociation, denial, splitting,
           and acting out. Mood disorders may be common.     
          3. Cluster C. The anxious or fearful cluster, which consists of avoidant,
           dependent, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorders. These disor-
           ders are characterized by the use of isolation, passive aggressiveness, and
           hypochondriasis.                                  
          4. Personality disorder traits refers to individuals who frequently exhibit traits
           that are not limited to a single personality disorder. When personality traits
           are rigid and maladaptive, and produce functional impairment or subjective
           distress, general personality disorder may be diagnosed.
         In this section, borderline personality disorder is chosen as an example to address
         the mental status assessment and diagnostic evaluation of personality disorders,
         as it represents the classic condition in this group of disorders.

=== Page 136 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 125
         The prevalence of borderline personality disorder is approximately 2% in the
       general population, predominantly (75%) in females. Physical and sexual abuse,
       neglect, hostile conflict, and early parental loss are common in the childhood
       histories of individuals with this disorder. Of clients with borderline personality
       disorders, 90% have one other psychiatric diagnosis, and 40% have two (Sadock
       et al., 2019). Common psychiatric comorbidities are depressive and bipolar disor-
       ders, substance use disorders, eating disorders (notably bulimia nervosa), PTSD,
       and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (APA, 2013). Clients with borderline
       personality disorder exhibit extraordinarily unstable mood, affect, behavior, object
       relations, and self-image. They are marked by pervasive and excessive instability
       in interpersonal relationships, significant mood swings, impulsive behavior with
       regard to money and sex, and often engage in substance abuse, reckless driving,
       or binge eating. Self-destructive, self-mutilating, and suicide gestures, threats,
       or attempts occur frequently. They tend to have micro-psychotic episodes, often
       with paranoia and transient dissociative symptoms. They also suffer from identity
       problems, as well as from feelings of emptiness and boredom, and always appear
       to be in a state of crisis (Sadock et al., 2019).     
       Diagnostic Criteria                                   
                                                             
       DSM-5 Borderline Personality Disorder Criteria Modified
        A. Signs and Symptoms: Pervasive pattern of instability in interpersonal rela-
          tionships, self-image, and affects, marked impulsivity, beginning by early
          adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more)
          of the following symptom criteria:                 
          1. Recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or self-mutilating
            behavior.                                        
          2. Frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment.
          3. Impulsivity in at least two areas that are potentially self-damaging (e.g.,
            spending, sex, substance abuse, reckless driving, binge eating).
          4. A pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships, character-
            ized by alternations between extremes of idealization and devaluation.
          5. Identity disturbance; markedly and persistently unstable self-image or
            sense of self.                                   
          6. Affective instability due to a marked reactivity of mood (e.g., intense
            episodic dysphoria, irritability, or anxiety, usually lasting a few hours or,
            rarely, more than a few days).                   
          7. Chronic feelings of emptiness.                  
          8. Inappropriate, intense anger or difficulty controlling anger (e.g., frequent
            displays of temper, constant anger, recurrent physical fights).
          9. Transient, stress-related paranoid ideation or severe dissociative symptoms.
        B. Differential Diagnosis: Borderline personality disorder often co-occurs with
          depressive disorder or bipolar disorder; when criteria for both are met, both
          may be diagnosed.

=== Page 137 (1 cols) ===
126 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
         Interviewing Techniques in Assessment of            
         Borderline Personality Disorder                     
         The following are samples of diagnostic interview questions designed to help
         the APMHN to elicit the symptoms of borderline personality disorder during the
         initial psychiatric evaluation of a client. Following the above DSM-5 diagnostic
         criteria of borderline personality disorder, sample interview questions are created
         with a rationale to evaluate each symptom criteria. 
                                                             
         Criterion 1: Recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or self-muti-
         lating behavior                                     
          Questions:                                         
                                                             
          1. Have you had thoughts of wanting to kill yourself? If you have, have you
           acted on them?                                    
                                                             
         (This is an open-ended question to explore the client’s suicidal ideation, intention,
         plan, and attempt(s). There is a myth that asking the client directly about suicidal
         ideation might give them the idea to kill themselves. To the contrary, open discus-
         sion of suicide could convey that suicidal ideation is no longer a sin to be hidden,
         but rather a problem to be solved and that help may be only a spoken word away
         [Shea, 1998a].)                                     
          2. Have you ever mutilated yourself, such as cutting your wrists, burning your-
           self with cigarette butts, or any other ways of hurting yourself?
                                                             
         (Clients with borderline personality disorder tend to cut or burn themselves,
         and it’s common that they report no pain. Self-mutilation seems to serve as a
         release for intense feelings of rage, often preceded by an argument or a broken
         relationship.)                                      
                                                             
         Criterion 2: Frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment
          Question: Are you often afraid that others may leave you or abandon you, so
         you try to make every effort to stop them from leaving you (even when it’s not
         real)?                                              
         Criterion 3: Impulsivity in at least two areas that are potentially self-damag-
         ing (e.g., spending, sex, substance abuse, reckless driving, binge eating)
          Question: Have you found yourself doing one or more of the following: driv-
         ing recklessly, engaging in unsafe sex, abusing alcohol or drugs, binge eating,
         gambling, or spending money recklessly?             
          (These clients frequently view life as boring, and coupled with their intense
         feelings of self-loathing, they ceaselessly seek stimulation, using drugs, engaging
         in unsafe sex, and binge eating to satisfy their feelings of emptiness.)

=== Page 138 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 127
       Criterion 4: A pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relation-
       ships characterized by alternating between extremes of idealization and
       devaluation                                           
         Question: When you meet people, do you find yourself very comfortable shar-
       ing the most intimate details with them? And do you then feel that these same
       people don’t care and are not there enough for you? For example, have you expe-
       rienced that most of your romantic relationships have been very intense, but not
       very stable?                                          
       Criterion 5: Identity disturbance; markedly and persistently unstable self-
       image or sense of self                                
         Question: Do you often experience a sudden shift in the way you look at your-
       self and your life, and do you completely change your goals, values, and career
       focus?                                                
                                                             
       Criterion 6: Affective instability due to a marked reactivity of mood (e.g.,
       intense episodic dysphoria, irritability, or anxiety, usually lasting a few hours
       or, rarely, more than a few days)                     
         Question: Do you find yourself at times highly sensitive and overly reactive
       to things happening in your life, and your mood becoming extremely irritable,
       anxious, or depressed for a short time?               
       Criterion 7: Chronic feelings of emptiness            
         Question: Do you often feel emptiness inside you unless you are around other
       people?                                               
         (These clients often experience life with no sense of inner self other than
       hollowness. Therefore, they tend to depend on others to give meaning to life.
       Consequently, they intensely dislike being alone and develop dependency on oth-
       ers, as well as fear of abandonment.)                 
                                                             
       Criterion 8: Inappropriate, intense anger or difficulty controlling anger (e.g.,
       frequent displays of temper, constant anger, recurrent physical fights)
         Question: Do you sometimes feel extremely angry and bitter for no apparent
       reason, and have a hard time controlling these feelings, engaging in verbal or
       physical altercations, or violence?                   
       Criterion 9: Transient, stress-related paranoid ideation or severe dissociative
       symptoms                                              
         Question: When you are stressed out, especially if you feel abandoned or
       betrayed by someone, have you found yourself being very paranoid, or feeling
       “spaced out” or having “out-of-body” experiences?     
         The following is a sample case exemplar of the initial psychiatric evaluation,
       including the rationale of how the diagnosis of borderline personality disorder is
       determined, and the proposed preliminary treatment plan. As indicated earlier, a

=== Page 139 (1 cols) ===
128 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
         client with borderline personality disorder presents a high likelihood of comorbid
         psychiatric disorder(s); therefore, it is essential for the APMHN to be mindful of
         evaluating the client while conducting the initial interview.
                                                             
         Case Exemplar                                       
                                                             
         The client’s initials are AF.                       
                                                             
         Initial Psychiatric Evaluation                      
                                                             
         A. Identification, Chief Complaint, and Reason for Referral
           AF is a 22-year-old Hispanic-American male, referred to the outpatient men-
           tal health clinic from the local hospital, where he stayed overnight for obser-
           vation following an attempt to cut himself with a pocket knife. His chief
           complaint was, “I feel like crap.” The client was accompanied by his mother.
         B. History of Present Illness                       
                                                             
           Two days ago, AF’s brother took him to the local hospital, where he was admit-
           ted overnight and then discharged with a referral to the mental health clinic.
           The client’s family reported that the brother found him cutting himself with a
           pocket knife and called 911. As per the client, he broke up with his girlfriend
           about 2 months ago, and just found out that she was pregnant with another
           man’s baby. AF became furious, even though he was no longer in a relationship
           with her, and felt the urge to cut himself. He reported a prior cutting incident,
           and also an attempt to commit suicide once in the past by overdosing on pills.
             As per the hospital discharge summary, the left wrist cuts made by the cli-
           ent at the time of the hospital admission were superficial and did not require
           any suturing. However, he was kept overnight for observation, and then dis-
           charged to the outpatient mental health clinic, as he denied suicidal ideation,
           intent, or plans. The client’s mother reported that AF got easily upset and irri-
           table, and was unhappy with his life. He often became argumentative with the
           mother and the brother, losing his temper and punching the walls and doors,
           usually for about 3–4 hours. The mother also reported that each time he threw
           a temper tantrum, he made threats of killing himself, which made both the
           mother and brother concerned about him. During the interview, the client
           was cooperative, responded appropriately to questions, and denied feeling
           depressed. However, AF claimed that ever since he was an adolescent, he
           has often felt empty inside, accompanied by loneliness. When asked about
           his recent hospitalization, he claimed that he terminated the relationship with
           his ex-girlfriend, but when he found out recently that she was pregnant by
           another man, he had intense feelings of betrayal and rage, followed by feeling
           numb and becoming totally spaced out. The next thing he did was try to cut
           his wrist, and he did not even feel any pain while doing it. He claimed that
           he did not intend to kill himself at the time, and denied any suicidal ideation/
           intent/plan. He also denied any signs of psychosis, including hallucinations,

=== Page 140 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 129
          delusions, paranoia, or any other thought disorders. He is oriented to date,
          time and place, and his cognitive functions are fully intact.
        C. Past Psychiatric History                          
                                                             
          AF was diagnosed with bipolar disorder when he was 17 years old and treated
          with Depakote 250 mg twice a day, but he claimed that the medication did not
          help his mood swings and angry outbursts, so he stopped taking it and did not
          follow up with the treatment. AF had a history of two previous hospitaliza-
          tions. One was in 2015, when he took an overdose, ingesting 10 pills of 250 mg
          Depakote following a verbal altercation with his mother and brother. He was
          hospitalized for 4 days and was discharged with the recommendation to follow
          up with outpatient treatment, but he did not. The second hospitalization was 2
          months ago, when he was found cutting his left wrist with a pocket knife fol-
          lowing the break-up with his girlfriend. He was evaluated at the comprehensive
          psychiatric emergency program (CPEP), and the injury from the cut was found
          to be superficial, non-bleeding, and didn’t need suturing. He was discharged
          from the CPEP with the assessment that he did not require inpatient treatment,
          and was referred to the outpatient mental health clinic, but did not follow up.
        D. Substance Use History                             
          AF denied any substance use, including alcohol, cannabis, cocaine, heroin,
          opiates, or benzodiazepines. However, he reported smoking six cigarettes per
          day and said he has no intention of quitting.      
        E. Social and Developmental History                  
          1. Education: AF completed high school and planned to go to college, but
            was not sure what he wanted to study.            
          2. Family Relationships, Social Network, and Abuse History: AF lives with his
            mother and his older brother in a three-bedroom apartment. He often gets
            into arguments with them; however, he believes that they are trying to help
            him and he hopes to have a decent relationship with them. AF reported that
            his father left the family when he was about 9 years old, and remembered
            that his father was very strict when he was a child. AF’s mother reported that
            his father was physically abusive toward AF during his childhood, but AF
            was reluctant to talk about his relationship with the father; he blamed him-
            self for his father leaving him and his family because his father was angry
            at him since AF was not a good son. AF is currently not in any intimate
            relationship, but reported that each of his relationships has lasted less than a
            year and each time he is the one who terminates it, saying “Everyone leaves
            me eventually anyway.” He further elaborated that most of his relationships
            have been very chaotic, with ups and downs like a roller-coaster. AF’s social
            activities are limited to his cousins, with whom he spends most of his time.
          3. Employment Record and/or Military History: AF has a history of working
            at different places for a short period of time. He currently works 10–15
            hours per week at a moving company. He does freelance writing, but is
            not clear about the details of his work. He doesn’t have a military history.

=== Page 141 (1 cols) ===
130 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
           4. Legal Record: AF denied having a history of legal issues.
           5. Religious Background: AF identifies as Roman Catholic, but is not
              religious.                                     
          F. Family History of Psychiatric Illnesses         
                                                             
           AF’s father was an alcoholic, but, other than that, AF denied having a history
           of mental illness in the family.                  
         G. Medical History and Review of Systems            
           1. Review of systems: No visible abnormality noted other than three super-
              ficial marks of redness on his left wrist from the attempt to cut.
           2. AF’s medical record from the hospital where he was discharged revealed
              no significant physical illness and no medications prescribed.
           3. No known allergies reported.                   
         H. Mental Status Examination                        
                                                             
           1. Appearance and Behavior: The client appeared to be the stated age and
              cleanly shaven, casually dressed in T-shirt and blue jeans. He presented
              with calm, cooperative behaviors and was easily engaged in the inter-
              view, with good eye contact.                   
           2. Mood: Euthymic.                                
           3. Affect: Mood congruent.                        
           4. Thought Content and Process: Speech was within a normal range with rate,
              rhythm, and volume. Thought process was linear, goal oriented, and coher-
              ent, with no evidence of delusion or any other thought disorders present.
           5. Perceptual Disturbances: Thought contents were nonpsychotic; he
              denied having any auditory/visual hallucinations, and denied having any
              suicidal/homicidal ideations, plans, or intentions. The client claimed that
              his self-mutilation gesture was not a suicidal attempt, but rather was an
              impulsive reaction to life stressors.          
           6. Sensorium, Cognitive, and Intellectual Functioning: Alert and oriented
              to time, place, and person. No evidence of cognitive impairment, and
              average intellectual functioning noted.        
          I. Diagnosis and Treatment Plan                    
           1. DSM-5 Diagnosis: Borderline personality disorder.
           2. Rationale for Diagnostic Criteria: According to the DSM-5 (APA,
              2013), the following criteria must be present to diagnose borderline
              personality disorder: pervasive pattern of instability in interpersonal
              relationships, self-image, and affects, marked impulsivity, beginning by
              early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five
              (or more) of the nine symptom criteria. The client meets those criteria, as
              indicated by the bold symptom categories:      
              1. Recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or self-mutilat-
                ing behavior. AF has made multiple threats of committing suicide,
                with one attempt by medication overdose, and has had two incidents
                of self-mutilation by cutting his wrist.

=== Page 142 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 131
            2. Frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment. All of AF’s
               intimate relationships have lasted less than a year and each time
               he was the one who terminated the relationship, saying “Everyone
               leaves me eventually anyway.”                 
            3. Impulsivity in at least two areas that are potentially self-damaging
               (e.g., spending, sex, substance abuse, reckless driving, binge eating).
            4. A pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships,
               characterized by alternating between extremes of idealization and
               devaluation. Most of AF’s intimate relationships have been very
               chaotic, with ups and downs like a roller-coaster.
            5. Identity disturbance; markedly and persistently unstable self-
               image or sense of self. AF was reluctant to talk about his relation-
               ship with the father and blamed himself for his father leaving him
               and his family because his father was angry at him since he was “not
               a good son.”                                  
            6. Affective instability due to a marked reactivity of mood (e.g., intense
               episodic dysphoria, irritability, or anxiety, usually lasting a few
               hours or, rarely, more than a few days). AF’s mother reported that
               AF became easily upset and irritable, and was unhappy with his life.
            7. Chronic feeling of emptiness. AF reported feelings of emptiness,
               accompanied by loneliness, since he was an adolescent.
            8. Inappropriate, intense anger or difficulty controlling anger. He
               often became angry and argumentative with the mother and the
               brother, followed by losing his temper and eventually punching the
               walls and doors, which usually lasted for 3–4 hours.
            9. Transient, stress-related paranoid ideation or severe dissociative
               symptoms. When AF got angry about his ex-girlfriend, he experi-
               enced intense feelings of betrayal, followed by numbness and being
               totally spaced out.                           
            The client’s final diagnosis is confirmed as borderline personality disorder,
          evidenced by meeting eight of the borderline personality disorder symptom
          criteria (requirement is the presence of five [or more] of the symptom criteria).
          3. Treatment Plan:                                 
            ·· There is proven evidence that dialectical behavior therapy (DBT)
               is one of the most effective forms of psychotherapy for borderline
               personality disorder (Choi-Kain et al., 2017). Therefore, AF could
               be referred to a DBT-trained therapist.       
            ·· AF was diagnosed with bipolar disorder when he was 17 years old
               and is currently not being treated for it. Therefore, a thorough inves-
               tigation of bipolar disorder as a potential comorbid psychiatric dis-
               order should be done.                         
            ·· A multimodal approach involving family psychoeducation, and fam-
               ily systems or dynamic intervention where possible, in combination
               with medications and individual psychotherapy, is recommended.

=== Page 143 (1 cols) ===
132 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
         References                                          
         American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
          mental disorders (DSM-5) (5th ed., text rev.). Author.
         American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2016). Practice guidelines for the psychiatric
          evaluation of adults (3rd ed.). American Psychiatric Association. https://doi.org/10
          .1176/appi.pn.2015.8a5                             
         Barry, P. (2005). Interpersonal psychotherapy. In K. Wheeler (Ed.), Psychotherapy for the
          advanced practice nurse (pp. 203–221). Mosby Elsevier.
         Choi-Kain, L. W., Finch, E. F., Masland, S. R., Jenkins, J. A., & Unruh, B. T. (2017).
          What works in the treatment of borderline personality disorder. Current Behavioral
          Neuroscience Reports, 4(1), 21–30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40473-017-0103-z
         Citrome, L. (2011). Neurochemical models of schizophrenia: Transcending dopamine.
          Current Psychiatry (Supplement), 10(9), S10–S14.   
         De Vries, Y., Roest, A., Bos, E., Burgerhof, J., Van Loo, H., & De Jonge, P. (2019).
          Predicting antidepressant response by monitoring early improvement of individual
          symptoms of depression: Individual patient data meta-analysis. British Journal of
          Psychiatry, 214(1), 4–10. https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.2018.122
         Frank, G., Shott, M. E., & DeGuzman, M. C. (2019). The neurobiology of eating disorders.
          Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 28(4), 629–640. https://
          doi10.1016/j.chc.2019.05.007. www.researchgate.net/publication/334234590
         Furuta, M., Horsch, A., Ng, E. S. W., Bick, D., Spain, D., & Sin, J. (2018). Effectiveness
          of trauma-focused psychological therapies for treating post-traumatic stress disorder
          symptoms in women following childbirth: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
          Frontiers in Psychiatry, 9(591), 1–17. ISSN 1664-0640. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt
          .2018.00591                                        
         Guerrera, C. S., Furneri, G., Grasso, M., Caruso, G., Castellano, S., Drago, F., Di-Nuovo, S.,
          & Caraci, F. (2020). Antidepressant drugs and physical activity: A possible synergism
          in the treatment of major depression? Frontiers in Psychology, 11(857), 1–9. https://doi
          .org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00857                      
         Hay, P., Chinn, D., Forbes, D., Madden, S., Newton, R., Sugenor, L., Touyz, S., & Ward,
          W. (2014). Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrist clinical practice
          guidelines for the treatment of eating disorders. Australian New Zealand Journal of
          Psychiatry, 48, 977–1008.                          
         Heerema, E. (2019). Talking to a loved one who has dementia: Effective communication
          strategies in Alzheimer’s. Verywell Health. www.verywellhealth.com/how-to-talk-to
          -someone-with-dementia-97963                       
         Information for Practice. (2012, December 8). Lifetime prevalence of DSM-IV/WMH-
          CIDI disorders by sex and cohort. https://ifp.nyu.edu/2012/infographics/lifetime
          -prevalence-of-dsm-ivwmh-cidi-disorders-by-sex-and-cohort-n9282/
         Jaggar, M., Fanibunda, S. E., Ghosh, S., Duman, R. S., & Vaidya, V. A. (2019).
          Chapter: The neurotrophic hypothesis of depression revisited: New insights and
          therapeutic implications. Neurobiology of Depression, 367, 43–62. https://doi:10.1016/
          B978-0-12-813333-0.00006-8                         
         Kadriu, B., Musazzi, L., Henter, I. D., Graves, M., Popoli, M., &Zarate Jr, C. A. (2019).
          Glutamatergic neurotransmission: Pathway to developing novel rapid-acting antidepressant
          treatments. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 22, 119–135.
         Kaltenboeck, A., & Harmer, C. (2018). The neuroscience of depressive disorders: A brief
          review of the past and some considerations about the future. Brain and Neuroscience
          Advances, 2, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1177/2398212818799269

=== Page 144 (1 cols) ===
Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation 133
       Kessler, R. C., & Bromet, E. J. (2013). The epidemiology of depression across
         cultures. Annual Review of Public Health, 34, 119–138. https://doi:10.1146/
         annurev-publhealth-031912-114409                    
       Lipari, R. N., & Van Horn, S. L. (2017, June 29). Trends in substance use disorders among
         adults aged 18 or older. The CBHSQ Report. Center for Behavioral Health Statistics
         and Quality, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
       McCance, K., & Huether, S. (2018). Pathophysiology: The biologic basis for disease in
         adults and children (8th ed.). Mosby Publisher. ISBN 9780323583473/0323583474
       Nakao, T., Okada, K., & Kanba, S. (2014). Neurobiological model of obsessive–
         compulsive disorder: Evidence from recent neuropsychological and neuroimaging
         findings. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 68(8), 587–605.
       National Institutes of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) (2021). Alcohol facts and
         statistics. www.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/brochures-and-fact-sheets/alcohol-facts-and
         -statistics                                         
       National Institutes of Health (NIH) (2015, November 18). Newsletter: 10 percent of US
         adults have drug use disorder at some point in their lives. www.nih.gov/news-events/
         news-releases/10-percent-us-adults-have-drug-use-disorder-some-point-their-lives
       National Institutes of Health: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIH–
         NIAAA) (2020, December). Understanding alcohol use disorder. www.niaaa.nih.gov/
         sites/default/files/publications/Alcohol_Use_Disorder.pdf
       Phillips, M. S., & Kupfer, D. J. (2013). Bipolar disorder diagnosis: Challenges and future
         directions. Lancet, 381(9878), 1663–1671.           
       Pietrabissa, G., Manzoni, G. M., Gibson, P. J., Boardman, D. V., Gori, A., & Castelnuovo,
         G. (2016). Brief strategic therapy for obsessive compulsive disorder: A clinical and
         research protocol of a one-group observational study. British Medical Journal, 6(3),
         e009118. https://doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015009118     
       Psych Scene Hub. (n.d.). Schizophrenia: Diagnostic interview. https://psychscenehub.com
         /psychpedia/schizophrenia-diagnostic-interview/     
       Sadock, B., & Sadock, V. (2010). Kaplan & Sadock’s Pocket handbook of clinical
         psychiatry (5th ed.). Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
       Sadock, B., Ahmad, S., & Sadock, V. (2019). Kaplan & Sadock’s pocket handbook of
         clinical psychiatry (6th ed.). Wolters Kluwer.      
       Saxena, S., Brody, A. L., Maidment, K. M., Dunkin, J. J., Colgan, M., Alborzian, S., Phelps,
         M. E., & Baxter, Jr., L. R. (1998). Localized orbitofrontal and subcortical metabolic
         changes and predictors of response to paroxetine treatment in obsessive compulsive
         disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 21(6), 683–693.  
       Shea, S. C. (1998). Psychiatric interviewing: The art of understanding (2nd ed.). W.B.
         Saunders. ISBN-13: 978-0721670119                   
       Spitzer, R. L., Kroenke, K., Williams, J. B., & Löwe, B. (2006). A brief measure for
         assessing generalized anxiety disorder: The GAD-7. Archives of General Internal
         Medicine, 166(10), 1092–1097. https://doi:10.1001/archinte.166.10.1092
       Stahl, S. M. (2013). Essential psychopharmacology: Neuroscientific bases and practical
         applications (4th ed.). Cambridge University Press. 
       Tracy, N. (2012). Effects of bipolar disorder. HealthyPlace. www.healthyplace.com/
         bipolar-disorder/bipolar-information/effects-of-bipolar-disorder
       Trygstad, L. N., Buccheri, R. K., Buffum, M. D., Dau-shen, J., & Dowling, G. A. (2015).
         Auditory hallucinations interview guide: Promoting recovery with an interactive
         assessment tool. Journal of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health Services, 53(1),
         20–28. https://doi.org/10.3928/02793695-20141203-01

=== Page 145 (1 cols) ===
134 Diagnostic Mental Health Evaluation             
         Van der Kolk, B. (2006). Clinical implications of neuroscience research in PTSD. Annals
          of New York Academy of Sciences, 1071(1), 277–293. 
         Victoria Department of Hospital & Health Services (DHHS); Victoria’s Hub for Health
          Services & Business. (2021). Differential diagnosis: Depression, delirium and
          dementia. www2.health.vic.gov.au/hospitals-and-health-services/patient-care/older
          -people/cognition/diff-diagnosis                   
         Villarroel, M. A., & Terlizzi, E. P. (2020, September). Symptoms of depression among
          adults: United States, 2019. NCHS Data Brief, no 379. National Center for Health
          Statistics. www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/index.htm    
         Yatham, L. N., Kennedy, S. H., Parikh, S. V., Schaffer, A., Bond, D. J., Frey, B. N.,
          Sharma, V., Goldstein, B. I., Rej, S., Beaulieu, S., Alda, M., MacQueen, G., Milev,
          R. V., Ravindran, A., O’Donovan, C., McIntosh, D., Lam, R. W., Vazquez, G.,
          Kapczinski, F., … Berk, M. (2018). Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety
          Treatments (CANMAT) and International Society for Bipolar Disorders (ISBD) 2018
          guidelines for the management of patients with bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders,
          20(2), 97–170. https://doi.org/10.1111/bdi.12609   
         Zisook, S. (2005). Death, dying, and bereavement. In B. J. Sadock & V. A. Sadock (Eds.),
          Comprehensive textbook of psychiatry (8th ed.) (pp. 2367–2393). Lippincott, Williams
          & Wilkins.

=== Page 146 (1 cols) ===
3    Practice Guidelines  for the                     
            Assessment  of Risk for                          
                                                             
            Violent Behaviors  during  the                   
            Psychiatric Evaluation                           
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Violence is defined as the intentional threat or actual use of physical force or
       power against oneself, a group, or a community that results in or has a high likeli-
       hood of resulting in injury, death, psychological harm, maldevelopment, and/or
       deprivation. There are two types of violence: (1) self-directed violence, such as
       suicide; and (2) other-directed violence, such as aggressive behaviors, including
       physical aggression or homicide. More than 1.3 million people worldwide die
       each year as a result of violence in all its forms, accounting for 2.5% of global
       mortality (World Health Organization [WHO], 2014).    
         The WHO (2019) reported that suicide is a global phenomenon that can occur
       throughout the lifespan. Approximately 800,000 people worldwide die by suicide
       each year, which is one person every 40 seconds. As of 2016, suicide accounted
       for 1.4% of all deaths worldwide, making it the 18th leading cause of death; 79%
       occurred in low- and middle-income countries. Furthermore, there are indications
       that for each adult who dies by suicide, more than 20 others may have attempted it
       (WHO, 2019). In the United States, approximately 40,000 people commit suicide
       each year, a rate of 12.5 deaths per 100,000 annually, and approximately 250,000
       people attempt suicide each year (Sadock et al., 2019).
         Homicide is also a global phenomenon. As of 2012, the latest year for which
       figures are available, an estimated 475,000 deaths occurred worldwide as a result
       of homicide. Of these, 60% were males aged 15–44 years, making homicide the
       third leading cause of death for males in this age group; overall, 82% of homicide
       deaths were males (6.7 per 100,000 population) (WHO, 2014). Within low- and
       middle-income countries, the highest estimated rates of homicide occur in the
       Americas, 28.5 per 100,000 population, with a lifetime risk of becoming a homi-
       cide victim of about 1 in 85 for men and 1 in 280 for women.
         There is little current data that estimates the percentage of severely mentally
       ill individuals who become violent. In the United States, a 1988 Department of
       Justice study reported that individuals with a history of mental illness (excluding
       drug or alcohol use) were responsible for 4.3% of homicides (897 out of 20,860).
       In instances in which the homicide occurred among family members, the percent-
       age was much higher—for example, in 25% of cases in which an individual killed
       their parent, that individual was mentally ill (Dawson and Langan, 1994). Studies
       of violence among seriously mentally ill individuals have been reported in the
                                   DOI: 10.4324/9781003137597-4

=== Page 147 (1 cols) ===
136 Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors        
         United States since 1990, indicating that 5–10% of such individuals commit acts
         of serious violence each year.                      
          However, studies have also shown the importance of treatment to reduce this
         violence (Torrey, 2006). Therefore, during the psychiatric evaluation, identifying
         a client who is at risk for violent behaviors can assist the advanced psychiatric
         mental health nurse (APMHN) to prepare specific interventions to reduce that
         client’s subjective distress, thereby diminishing the overall risk of harm and safe-
         guarding clients, staff, and others with whom the client comes in contact from
         potentially violent behavior. This chapter will discuss how the APMHN can iden-
         tify violent clients and conduct an appropriate assessment of them, as it is among
         the most critical tasks in psychiatry.              
                                                             
         Section 1: Assessment of Suicidal Clients           
         Suicide assessment is an essential first step in helping APMHNs estimate a cli-
         ent’s risk for suicide. After that assessment has been conducted, a determina-
         tion can be made as to an appropriate treatment setting, and an individualized
         treatment plan can be formulated that addresses specific modifiable risk factors,
         including any need for heightened observation. A suicide assessment protocol is
         composed of the following steps: (1) gathering information related to a client’s
         risk and protective factors, and the warning signs for suicide; (2) gathering infor-
         mation related to the client’s suicidal ideation, planning, behaviors, desire, and
         intent; and (3) the clinical decision-making that is subsequently applied to create
         a formulation of risk.                              
          Inquiring about suicidal thoughts during the initial psychiatric evaluation may
         improve the identification of clients who are at increased risk of suicide, and
         specific interventions may be able to reduce the client’s subjective distress and
         overall risk of self-injury or death. However, when communicating with the cli-
         ent, it is important to remember that simply asking about suicidal ideas or other
         elements of the assessment will not ensure that accurate or complete information
         is received. For example, during the initial evaluation, the client may appear to be
         cooperative with the assessment and forthcoming with answers to questions; how-
         ever, if the client appears to be sullen, guarded, irritable, or agitated, the APMHN
         may find the information limited to behavioral observations.
          The APMHN should consider several elements when assessing a client’s risk
         of suicide:                                         
          1. There is no evidence that risk of suicide is increased by asking a client directly
           about current suicidal ideas, plans, and/or intents.
          2. If a client appears to minimize the severity of suicidal behaviors, or if the
           clinical presentation seems inconsistent with an initial denial of suicidal
           thoughts, additional questioning of the client or of significant others may be
           indicated.                                        
          3. Cultural factors are important to consider when framing questions, since
           issues such as shame, guilt, or humiliation can be culturally mediated and

=== Page 148 (1 cols) ===
Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors 137
          influence a client’s risk of or willingness to discuss suicidal thoughts or sui-
          cide plans.                                        
        4. Factors involving the interviewing clinician, such as time pressures, inter-
          viewing style, and preconceived notions about suicide, can influence the abil-
          ity to conduct an accurate assessment.             
        5. Clients with an intellectual disability or a neurocognitive disorder may have
          difficulty understanding questions as initially posed, and flexibility may be
          needed to reframe questions in a clearer manner.   
        6. Using open-ended questions rather than closed ones is more conducive to
          capturing the nuances and narrative of the client’s concerns, with follow-up
          questioning as needed to hone in on additional details.
        7. No study has demonstrated which population-based risk factors or com-
          binations of them can accurately predict which clients will die by suicide.
          Accordingly, estimation of an individual client’s risk for suicide is ultimately
          a matter of clinician judgment, which requires synthesizing the available
          information and deciding how to weigh the contributions of multiple factors.
        8. In synthesizing and documenting information gained from the initial evalua-
          tion, the APMHN should focus primarily on estimating the patient’s immedi-
          ate suicide risk, while also taking into account longer-term contributors to
          risk that may need to be considered in treatment planning.
                 (Adapted from American Psychiatric Association [APA], 2016)
        A. Risk factors associated with suicide in the United States
                                                             
          1. Gender:                                         
            ·· Women attempt suicide four times more often than do men.
            ·· Men commit suicide three times more often than do women.
          2. Age:                                            
            ·· The suicide rate tends to increase with age, peaks after age 45 for
               men and after age 65 for women.               
            ·· The most rapid increase in suicide is currently among 15–24-year-
               old males.                                    
          3. Race:                                           
            ·· Two out of every three suicides are committed by white males.
            ·· Suicide rates are higher than average for Native Americans and
               Inuits.                                       
          4. Marital status:                                 
            ·· Single persons are twice as likely as married persons to attempt
               suicide.                                      
            ·· Divorced, separated, or widowed persons are four to five times as
               likely as married persons to attempt suicide. 
          5. Health status:                                  
            ·· Those with chronic physical illness, especially if associated with
               chronic pain or terminal illness, are at least twice as likely to report

=== Page 149 (1 cols) ===
138 Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors        
                suicidal behaviors or to complete suicide; it is of the utmost impor-
                tance to target which risk factors contribute the most to increasing
                suicidality (Racine, 2018).                  
              ·· Mental illnesses: 95% of all suicides occur in people suffering from
                a psychiatric disturbance.                   
              ·· Depressive disorders: 50% of all persons who commit suicide are
                depressed.                                   
              ·· Panic disorder: Almost 20% of all clients diagnosed with panic dis-
                order attempt suicide, and 1% commit suicide.
              ·· Schizophrenia: Approximately 4,000 clients with schizophrenia
                commit suicide each year; approximately 10% of those who have
                prominent delusions and command hallucinations telling them to
                harm themselves are at increased risk.       
              ·· Personality disorders (PDs):                
                ·· Borderline personality disorder is associated with a high rate of
                   para-suicidal behavior, such as self-injury directed at the sur-
                   face of the body to induce relief from a negative feeling.
                ·· Antisocial personality disorder: Approximately 5% of clients
                   with this disorder commit suicide.        
           6. Substance dependence:                          
              ·· Alcohol dependence increases the risk of comorbid depressive dis-
                orders by two-thirds and consequently increases the risk of suicide.
              ·· Heroin and other forms of substance dependence increase the sui-
                cide rate by approximately 20 times that of the general population.
           7. Other risk factors:                            
              ·· Unambiguous wish to die.                    
              ·· Sense of hopelessness.                      
              ·· Hoarding pills.                             
              ·· Access to lethal agents or firearms.        
              ·· Previous suicide attempt(s).                
              ·· Family history of suicide or depression.    
              ·· Fantasies of reunion with deceased loved ones.
              ·· History of childhood physical or sexual abuse.
              ·· History of impulsive or aggressive behavior.
                                  (Adapted from Sadock et al., 2019)
         Risk factors for suicide can vary among individuals, such as revenge, shame,
         humiliation, delusional guilt, command hallucinations, wanting to gain attention
         or a reaction from others, escaping physical or psychological pain, loneliness,
         self-hatred, or a sense of being a burden, of not belonging, of feeling trapped, or
         of having no purpose. In contrast, protective factors from suicide can include reli-
         gious beliefs, a sense of responsibility to children or others, strong social support,
         plans for the future, or a sense of purpose in life. Given the large number of pos-
         sible factors that can affect the risk of suicide, the APMHN can neither review nor

=== Page 150 (1 cols) ===
Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors 139
       document all of them, but can provide an estimated level of suicide risk, including
       risk and/or protective factors. It may also be helpful to conceptualize the overall
       risk in terms of underlying nonmodifiable risk factors as well as more immediate
       precipitants that may contribute to acute risk but are more likely to be modifiable
       (APA, 2016).                                          
                                                             
        B. Sample questions for assessment of current and prior suicidal thoughts
          and behaviors                                      
          1. Addressing the client’s general suicidal ideas, plans, and intent,
            including active or passive thoughts of suicide or death:
            ·· Have you ever felt that life was not worth living?
            ·· Did you ever wish not to wake up from sleeping?
            ·· Is death something you have thought about recently?
            ·· Have things ever reached the point that you have thought about
               suicide?                                      
          2. If the client reports current suicidal ideas, the following questions
            are warranted:                                   
               Client’s intended course of action if current symptoms worsen.
            ·· Question: Have you made any specific plan to end your life if you
               feel that things are not working out?         
               Access to suicide methods, including firearms.
            ·· Question: Have you made any particular preparations, such as writ-
               ing a note or a will, making financial arrangements, or purchasing
               a gun or weapon?                              
               Client’s possible motivations for suicide (e.g., attention or reaction
               from others, revenge, shame, humiliation, delusional guilt, com-
               mand hallucinations).                         
            ·· Question: What led up to your suicidal thoughts?
               Reasons for living (e.g., sense of responsibility to children or others,
               religious beliefs).                           
            ·· Question: What things in your life lead you to want to go on living?
               Quality and strength of the therapeutic alliance.
            ·· Question: What things in your life make you feel more hopeful about
               the future?                                   
          3. Addressing the client’s past history of suicidal ideas, plans, and
            attempts, including attempts that were aborted or interrupted, as
            well as prior intentional self-injury in which there was no suicide
            intent:                                          
            ·· Was there a time in the past when you tried to end your life? And can
               you describe what happened?                   
            ·· What were the circumstances that led you to suicidal thoughts (e.g.,
               divorce, loss of job or loved one, a serious health issue)?
            ·· How close did you come to acting on the suicidal thoughts?
            ·· What thoughts were you having beforehand that led up to the sui-
               cidal attempt?

=== Page 151 (1 cols) ===
140 Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors        
              ·· Was anyone present when you made the suicidal attempt?
              ·· How did you feel afterward (e.g., relief or regret about being
                alive)?                                      
              ·· Did you receive treatment following your suicidal thought or
                attempt?                                     
           4. For individuals with psychosis, ask specifically about hallucinations
              and delusions:                                 
              ·· Can you describe the voices (e.g., single versus multiple, male ver-
                sus female, internal versus external, recognizable versus stranger)?
              ·· What do the voices say?                     
              ·· Have there been times when the voices told you to hurt or kill
                yourself?                                    
              ·· Have you ever done what the voices asked you to do?
                                  (Adapted from Sadock et al., 2019).
         C. Interviewing techniques when assessing suicidal clients: Chronological
           Assessment of Suicide Events (CASE) approach      
             The ultimate goal of the interviewing strategy is to help the clinician
           assess the client’s actual suicidal intent by maximizing the validity of their
           stated and reflected intent while minimizing their withheld intent. The
           Chronological Assessment of Suicide Events (CASE) approach is a highly
           organized interviewing technique that has been positively received by mental
           health professionals and suicidologists, substance abuse counselors, primary
           care clinicians, clinicians in the correctional system, legal experts, military/
           VA mental health professionals, and psychiatric residency directors (Shea,
           2004). The CASE approach provides APMHNs with a practical framework
           for exploring and better understanding how to elicit suicidal ideation, behav-
           ior, desire, and intent in a client so that the APMHN can develop an individu-
           alized approach with which they feel comfortable and competent.
           1. Validity techniques of the CASE approach       
             The CASE validity techniques emphasize the impact of the questions the
           APMHN asks and of how the APMHN asks them. Two validity techniques
           proven to be valuable are normalization and shame attenuation.
              a. Normalization is a process of normalizing a topic for the client, and
                is an unobtrusive method of raising the issue of suicide. For exam-
                ple, the APMHN might say, “Sometimes when people feel as much
                pain as you are feeling, they have thought of killing themselves. Has
                that happened to you?”                       
              b. Shame attenuation is based on the assumption that if a client
                answers positively to sensitive questions, such as about suicide
                attempts or thoughts, they are in essence admitting a failure and then
                feel shame. With shame attenuation, the client’s own pain is used as
                the gateway to the topic of suicide to reduce the shame by discuss-
                ing suicide openly and nonjudgmentally. The APMHN might ask,
                “Considering all of the pain you’ve been feeling in the past couple

=== Page 152 (1 cols) ===
Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors 141
               of weeks, I’m wondering if you have had any thoughts of killing
               yourself?”                                    
                                                             
            Four cornerstones of these validity techniques are used to explore the
          extent of suicidal ideation:                       
             a. Behavioral incident: Questions that ask for specific facts, behavio-
               ral details, or trains of thought. By asking about a series of behav-
               ioral incidents, the interviewer can sometimes help a patient to
               share thoughts and feelings honestly by re-creating, step by step,
               the unfolding of a potentially taboo topic, such as a suicidal attempt,
               thereby enabling the interviewer to get accurate information. The
               following are prototypes of typical behavioral incidents and related
               sample questions:                             
               ·· Fact-finding behavioral incident sample questions:
               ·· “How many pills did you take?”             
               ·· “Did you put the razor blade to your wrist?
               ·· “How many bottles of pills did you actually store up?”
               ·· “When you say that ‘you tried to end it all,’ what did you actu-
                 ally do?”                                   
               ·· Sequencing behavioral incident sample questions:
               ·· “What did you do next?” or “What did your wife do then?”
               ·· “What did your husband say right after he found out that you
                 tried to hang yourself?”                    
               ·· “Can you tell me what happened next?”      
            Clinical caveat: Behavioral incidents are excellent at uncovering hid-
          den information, but are time-consuming. Therefore, using only this clinical
          approach can be impractical when the APMHN is pressured for sufficient
          time to do a full initial intake. With a potentially suicidal client, the APMHN
          must be selective as to when to employ behavioral incidents and when to
          employ other questioning techniques.               
            b. Gentle assumption: Gentle assumption can be used when the
               APMHN suspects that a client may be hesitant to discuss a suicidal
               behavior. With gentle assumption, the APMHN assumes that the
               potentially embarrassing or incriminating behavior is occurring and
               frames each question accordingly, in a gentle tone of voice. The fol-
               lowing are prototypes of gentle assumption sample questions:
               ·· What kinds of problems have you had at work?
               ·· What other ways have you thought of killing yourself?
            Clinical caveat: Gentle assumptions are powerful examples of leading
          questions and therefore must be used with care. They should not be used with
          clients who may feel intimidated by the APMHN or who are trying to provide
          what they think the APMHN wants to hear.           
             c. Denial of the specific: After a client has denied a generic question,
               it is surprising how asking a series of specific questions can jar the

=== Page 153 (1 cols) ===
142 Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors        
                client’s memory. This approach can also be effective as it appears to be
                harder to falsely deny a specific as opposed to a generic question. The
                following are prototypes of denial of the specific sample questions:
                ·· Have you ever thought of shooting yourself?
                ·· Have you ever thought of overdosing?      
                ·· Have you ever thought of hanging yourself?
             Clinical caveat: It is important for the APMHN to frame each denial of the
           specific as a separate question, pausing between each inquiry and waiting for
           the client’s denial or admission before asking the next question. The clinician
           should avoid combining the inquiries into a single question, such as, “Have
           you ever thought of shooting yourself, overdosing, or hanging yourself?” A
           series of items combined in this way is called a “cannon question,” and can
           frequently lead to invalid information, as clients generally only hear parts of
           them or respond to only one item in the string, often the last one.
              d. Symptom amplification: This technique is based on the observa-
                tion that clients often minimize the frequency of their disturbing
                behaviors, such as the frequency with which they cut their wrists or
                think about overdosing on pills. In such a situation, symptom ampli-
                fication is used in an effort to determine the frequency of a particu-
                lar behavior without creating a confrontational atmosphere. For a
                question to be viewed as symptom amplification, the APMHN must
                suggest a specific number of times, set high, that a client practices a
                behavior. It therefore should only be used if the APMHN suspects
                that the client is about to minimize, not maximize, as clients who
                do the latter tend to seek attention from others. The following is a
                prototype of a symptom amplification sample question:
                ·· “On the days when your thoughts of suicide are most intense,
                   how much of your time do you spend thinking about killing
                   yourself … 70% of your waking hours, 80%, 90%?”
             Clinical caveat: It is important not to set the upper limit at such a high
           number that it seems absurd or creates the appearance that the APMHN does
           not know what they are talking about.             
           2. Sequence of the CASE approach                  
             In the CASE approach, the clinician sequentially explores the following
           four chronological steps:                         
              Step 1: Presenting suicide events (within the past 48 hours).
              Step 2: Recent suicide events (within the preceding 2 months).
              Step 3: Past suicide events (from 2 months ago and further back in time).
              Step 4: Immediate suicide events (suicidal feelings, ideation, and intent
                that arise during the interview itself).     
             The term “suicide events” includes any of the following: death wishes,
           suicidal feelings and thoughts, planning, behaviors, desire, and intent.
              Step 1: Exploration of presenting suicide events
             Whether the client spontaneously raises the topic of suicide or the
           APMHN sensitively uncovers it with techniques such as normalization or

=== Page 154 (1 cols) ===
Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors 143
          shame attenuation, suicidal events are viewed as “presenting suicide events”
          if they occurred within the last 48 hours. If a client presents with such cur-
          rent suicidal behavior or with pressing suicidal ideation, it becomes critical
          to understand the severity of the attempt or ideation, as the APMHN’s for-
          mulation of the client’s immediate risk will determine the urgency of recom-
          mended follow-up, whether from an emergency department (ED) or from a
          crisis hotline.                                    
       The exploration of presenting suicide events can be summarized as follows:
                                                             
        1. The APMHN begins with a question, such as, “It sounds like last night was
          a very difficult time. It will help me to understand exactly what you experi-
          enced if you can sort of walk me through what happened step by step.”
        2. As the client begins to describe the unfolding suicide attempt, to maximize
          validity the APMHN can use one or two anchor questions, which aim to
          anchor the client into a specific memory, as opposed to recalling a collec-
          tion of nebulous feelings. Such a refined focus will often bring forth more
          valid information as the episode becomes both more real and more vivid to
          the client. For example, for a client with a suicide event involving a gun, the
          APMHN could ask anchor questions such as, “When did you take the gun
          out?” and “Where were you sitting when you had the gun out?”
            The APMHN then proceeds to use a series of behavioral incident ques-
          tions, making it easy to picture the unfolding events—the “verbal videotape.”
          For example, if the APMHN uses a mix of fact-finding and sequencing
          behavioral incident questions with a client who took some actions with a
          gun, the series may look something like the following:
          “Do you have a gun in the house?”                  
          “Have you ever gotten the gun out with the thought of using it to kill
          yourself?”                                         
          “When did you do this?”                            
          “Where were you sitting when you had the gun out?” 
          “Did you load the gun?”                            
          “What did you do next?” (sequencing behavioral incident)
          “Did you put the gun up to your body or your head?”
          “Did you take the safety off or load the chamber?” 
          “How long did you hold the gun there?”             
          “What thoughts were going through your mind then?” 
          “What did you do then?” (sequencing behavioral incident)
          “What stopped you from pulling the trigger?”       
            Step 2: Exploration of recent suicide events     
            Often, the APMHN can elicit the client’s thoughts about recent suicide
          events—that is, events that occurred within the preceding 2 months—once
          presenting suicide events have been explored. A gentle assumption is used to
          look for a second suicide attempt or method by asking, for example, “What

=== Page 155 (1 cols) ===
144 Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors        
           other ways have you thought of killing yourself?” This type of question can
           elicit more information from the client, as it cannot simply be answered yes
           or no. If the same plan was recently contemplated or if a second method
           is uncovered, sequential behavioral incident questions are used to create
           another verbal videotape.After establishing the list of methods considered by
           the client and the extent of action taken for each method, the APMHN hones
           in on the frequency, duration, and intensity of the suicidal ideation by using
           symptom amplification. For example,               
          1. “Over the past 2 months, during the days when you were most thinking about
           killing yourself, how much time did you spend thinking about it … 70% of
           your waking hours, 80%? 90%?”                     
                                                             
              Step 3: Exploration of past suicide events     
                                                             
         What past suicidal history—that is, suicide events from 2 months ago and further
           back in time—is important to gather? For clinical efficacy, and given that the
           APMHN will likely have a limited amount of time for the initial assessment,
           only information that could potentially change the clinical triage and any
           decisions about client follow-up should be sought. Thus, the following ques-
           tions are worth investigating:                    
          1. What is the most serious past suicide attempt? (Is the current ideation focused
           on the same method? Does the client view the current stressors and options in
           the same light as during the most dangerous past attempt?)
          2. Are the current triggers and the client’s current psychopathological state sim-
           ilar to when the most serious attempts were made? (The client may be prone
           to suicide following the break-up of relationships or during episodes of acute
           intoxication, intense anxiety, or psychosis.)     
          3. What is the approximate number of past gestures and attempts? (Large num-
           bers can point to issues of manipulation, making the APMHN less concerned,
           or to the possibility that the patient has truly exhausted all hope, making the
           APMHN more concerned. In either case, it is important to know.)
          4. When was the most recent attempt outside of the 2 months explored in Step
           2? (There could have been a significant attempt within the past 6 months that
           may signal the need for more immediate concern.)  
              Step 4: Exploration of immediate suicide events
                                                             
         Here, the interviewer focuses on, “What is this client’s suicidal intent right now?”
           The APMHN explores any suicidal ideation, intent, and plan that the client
           may be experiencing during the interview itself and also inquires whether the
           client thinks they are likely to have further thoughts of suicide after leaving
           the office, ED, or inpatient unit, or gets off the phone following a crisis call,
           depending on where the assessment is taking place. The region of immediate

=== Page 156 (1 cols) ===
Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors 145
          events also includes any appropriate safety planning. The focus of the explo-
          ration of immediate events is thus on the present and future.
                                                             
       A sound starting place is the question, “Right now, are you having any thoughts
       about wanting to kill yourself?” From this inquiry, a variety of questions can be
       used to further explore the client’s desire to die, such as:
          ● “How would you describe how bad the pain is for you in your divorce
            right now, ranging from ‘It’s sort of tough, but I can handle it okay’ to
            ‘If it doesn’t let up, I don’t know if I can go on?’”
          ● “In the upcoming week, how will you handle your pain if it worsens?”
                                                             
       Questions such as the following can help delineate intent:
          ● “I realize that you can’t know for sure, but what is your best guess as to
            how likely it is that you will try to kill yourself during the next week,
            ranging from highly unlikely to very likely?”    
          ● “What keeps you from killing yourself?”          
                                                             
       It is important to explore the client’s current level of hopelessness and to assess
       whether the client is making productive plans for the future or is amenable to pre-
       paring concrete plans for dealing with current problems and stresses. Questions
       such as the following may be asked:                   
          ·· “How does the future look to you?”              
          ·· “Do you feel hopeful about the future?”         
          ·· “What things would make you feel more or less hopeful about the
            future?”                                         
          ·· “What things in your life make you want to go on living?”
                              (Adapted from Shea, 1998, 2002, 2009)
       It is important to note that while the CASE approach is a flexible interview strat-
       egy, it is devoted solely to the elicitation of suicidal events and is therefore always
       employed within the context of some other clinical interview, such as an initial
       psychiatric assessment. In addition, the CASE approach is not a method of uncov-
       ering risk/protective factors for suicide; rather, such vital information should be
       gathered during a full mental status examination of, for example, the client’s his-
       tory of substance use, the presence and intensity of the client’s anxiety/agitation,
       and/or the presence of psychosis.                     
                                                             
       Section 2: Assessment of Other-Directed Violence,     
       including Aggressive Behaviors and Homicide           
                                                             
       The criminological and psychiatric literature suggests that risk factors for other-
       directed violence, including homicide, are in some respects different for people
       with mental disorders than for the general population (Buchanan et al., 2012). The

=== Page 157 (1 cols) ===
146 Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors        
         mental disorders most commonly associated with aggressive behaviors leading
         to other-directed violence are paranoia, command hallucination, and substance
         intoxication. Diagnoses that tend to show aggressive behaviors are personality
         disorders (i.e., borderline and antisocial PDs), which are characterized by rage
         and poor impulse control, and cognitive disorders (typically those associated
         with frontal and temporal lobe involvement) (Sadock et al., 2019). Therefore, it
         is essential that the APMHN evaluate a client’s risk for other-directed violence
         during the initial psychiatric evaluation. (Please note that the term “violence” is
         commonly used in the literature to refer to “other-directed violence,” and there-
         fore will be used in that way for the rest of this section.)
          Evaluating such risk in a client is ultimately a matter of clinician judgment that
         requires synthesizing the available information and deciding how to weigh the con-
         tributions of multiple factors, including those that may encourage the client to vio-
         lently act on aggressive ideas as well as those that may discourage them from doing
         so. This clinical decision-making process and a discussion of the factors that are
         judged to influence the client’s risk of aggressive and violent behavior should be
         included in the clinical documentation, typically in a brief paragraph. Distinctions
         between modifiable risk factors (e.g., alcohol or substance use, psychosis) that
         could be reduced by treatment or other interventions, and static, nonmodifiable
         risk factors (e.g., age, sex, clinical history) are also important to note in assessing
         and documenting risk and arriving at a plan for addressing it (APA, 2016).
         Risk Factors for Aggressive and Violent Behaviors   
          1. Nonmodifiable risk factors:                     
           ·· Sociodemographic:                              
              ·· Young age (late teens or early 20s).        
              ·· Male.                                       
           ·· Personal history:                              
              ·· History of aggressive and violent behaviors, impulsivity, in similar
                circumstances.                               
              ·· Recent act(s) of violence/destruction of property.
              ·· History of being physically abused in childhood.
              ·· History of being exposed to violent behaviors of other family
                members.                                     
          2. Modifiable risk factors:                        
           ·· Presence of symptoms of psychiatric disorders: 
              ·· Substance use: Alcohol or stimulant intoxication.
              ·· PDs: Antisocial PD, borderline PD.          
              ·· Psychosis: Symptoms of paranoid delusions, command
                hallucinations.                              
              ·· Psychiatric disorders secondary to a general medical condition:
                Dementia, delirium.                          
              ·· Intermittent explosive disorder.

=== Page 158 (1 cols) ===
Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors 147
          ·· Environment:                                    
            ·· Weapons available: Remove by either client’s family member or
               legal authority.                              
            ·· Intended victim(s) picked out: Apply the Tarasoff duty to protect
               following the requirements of the local jurisdiction.
        3. Additional risk factors to be considered in EDs and inpatient units:
          ·· Aggressive attributional style (hostile, suspicious, or believing others
            intend harm).                                    
          ·· Command hallucinations to harm others.          
          ·· Poor therapeutic alliance has been implicated.  
          ·· Some paraphilias are risk factors for sexual offending.
                                                             
       The APA (2016) recommends that the initial psychiatric evaluation of a client
       include an assessment of current and past aggressive or psychotic ideas, including
       thoughts of physical or sexual aggression or homicide. Skillful clinicians assess-
       ing the possibility of a client’s dangerous behavior formulate and test a series
       of clinical hypotheses to define any patterns of violence in the individual’s his-
       tory. Once defined, these patterns can be utilized to explain and predict a client’s
       potential for violence. The APA (2016) proposes the following guidelines of risk
       assessment for aggressive/violent behaviors.          
                                                             
       Guidelines of Risk Assessment for Aggressive/Violent Behaviors
        1. The initial psychiatric evaluation of a client includes assessing:
          ·· Current and prior aggressive or psychotic ideas, including thoughts
            of physical or sexual aggression or homicide (e.g., command
            hallucinations).                                 
          ·· Past aggressive/violent behaviors (e.g., homicide, domestic or workplace
            violence, other physically or sexually aggressive threats or acts), as this
            is the most robust statistical indicator of further violence.
          ·· Consequences of past aggressive behaviors leading to legal or discipli-
            nary actions, psychiatric hospitalization, and/or ED visits.
          ·· History of violent behaviors in biological relatives.
          ·· Current or recent substance use disorder or change in use of alcohol or
            other substances.                                
          ·· Presence of psychosocial stressors.             
          ·· Exposure to violence or aggressive behavior, including combat exposure
            or childhood abuse.                              
          ·· Past or current neurological or neurocognitive disorders or symptoms.
        2. When it is determined during an initial psychiatric evaluation that the
          client has aggressive ideas, the APA recommends assessing:
          ·· Impulsivity, including anger management issues. 
          ·· Access to firearms.

=== Page 159 (1 cols) ===
148 Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors        
           ·· Specific individuals or groups toward whom homicidal or aggressive
              ideas or behaviors have been directed in the past or at present.
           ·· History of violent behaviors in biological relatives.
          3. The clinician who conducts the initial psychiatric evaluation should doc-
           ument an estimation of risk of aggressive behavior (including homicide),
           including factors influencing risk.               
                                                             
         Inquiring during the initial psychiatric evaluation about aggressive and violent
         behaviors and thoughts, as well as about related risk or protective factors, may
         improve the identification of clients who are at increased risk of violent behaviors.
         If aggressive and violent thoughts or other modifiable risk factors are found, specific
         interventions may be able to reduce the client’s subjective distress and diminish the
         overall risk of harm by determining an appropriate treatment setting and formulating
         an individualized treatment plan that may include heightened observation or may
         target specific modifiable risk factors. However, there is no evidence that assessing
         any of these factors or utilizing specific violence rating scales can predict violence
         in an individual. Despite these limitations, there is consensus by experts that the
         benefits of assessing the factors described in the above guidelines in an initial psy-
         chiatric evaluation clearly outweigh the potential harms, including unclear costs.
          (Modified guideline statements for assessment of risk for aggressive behaviors,
         APA, 2016)                                          
         Management of Aggressive, Violent, or Homicidal     
         Clients during the Psychiatric Evaluation           
         Managing aggressive, violent, or homicidal clients in psychiatric practice involves
         a range of activities, from prescribing appropriate treatment to ensuring a safe
         environment.                                        
                                                             
          1. The APMHN should always protect self:           
           ·· Assume that violence and homicide are always a possibility.
           ·· Never interview an armed client (the client should always surrender a
              weapon or potential weapon to secure personnel).
           ·· Know as much as possible about the client before the interview.
           ·· Never interview a potentially violent client alone or in an office with the
              door closed.                                   
           ·· Remove neckties, necklaces, and other articles of clothing or jewelry
              that the client can grab or pull.              
           ·· Stay within sight of other staff members.      
           ·· Keep at least an arm’s length away from any potentially violent client.
           ·· Always leave a route of rapid escape in case the client attacks you.
           ·· Never turn your back on the client.            
          2. Observation of signs of impending violence and homicide:
           ·· Psychomotor agitation.                         
           ·· Recent violent acts against people or property.

=== Page 160 (1 cols) ===
Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors 149
          ·· Clenched teeth and fists, verbal threats.       
          ·· Possession of weapons or of objects potentially usable as weapons.
          ·· Drug or alcohol intoxication.                   
          ·· Paranoid delusions and/or command hallucinations.
        3. Provide a nonstimulating environment.             
        4. Explore possible psychosocial interventions to reduce the risk of violence
          and homicide (e.g., if violence is related to a specific situation or person,
          try to separate the client from that situation or person).
        5. Intended victims must be warned of the continued possibility of danger
          (e.g., if the client is not hospitalized).         
                                 (Adapted from Sadock et al., 2019)
       There are different approaches to violence risk assessment, such as clinical assess-
       ment and anamnestic assessment. In general, a mental health clinician conducts
       clinical risk assessment of violence by gathering information related to a poten-
       tial risk, including history, which is then processed by the clinician to offer their
       clinical impressions and judgments. It is a relatively unstructured approach by
       which the mental health clinician gathers whatever information they believe to be
       relevant to the assessment and prediction task, and processes it in whatever way
       they consider appropriate. Anamnestic risk assessment is a specific type of clini-
       cal assessment whereby the examiner attempts to identify violence risk factors
       through a detailed examination of the individual’s history of violent and threat-
       ening behavior. Through a clinical interview, review of third-party information
       (e.g., arrest reports, hospital accounts, reports of significant others), and perhaps
       psychological or other types of testing, the examining clinician tries to identify
       themes or commonalities across violence episodes that can be used to articulate
       risk or protective factors specific to the individual.
       Violence Screening Sample Questions                   
                                                             
        1. Screening Questions during General Clinical Assessment:
          ·· What kinds of things make you mad? What do you do when you get mad?
          ·· What is your temper like? What kinds of things can make you lose your
            temper?                                          
          ·· What is the most violent thing you have ever done and how did it
            happen?                                          
          ·· What is the closest you have ever come to being violent?
          ·· Have you ever used a weapon in a fight or to hurt someone?
          ·· What would have to happen for you to get so mad or angry that you
            would hurt someone?                              
          ·· Do you own weapons like guns or knives? Where are they now?
        2. Anamnestic Violence Risk Analysis: Detailed Questions Related to
          Specific Incidents:                                
          ·· What kind(s) of harm occurred?                  
          ·· Who were the victims(s) and/or targets?

=== Page 161 (1 cols) ===
150 Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors        
           ·· In what setting or environment did the altercation(s) take place?
           ·· What do you think caused the violence?         
           ·· What were you thinking before the altercation(s)?
           ·· What were you thinking during the altercation(s)?
           ·· What were you thinking after the altercations(s)?
           ·· How were you feeling before the altercation(s)?
           ·· How were you feeling during the altercation(s)?
           ·· How were you feeling after the altercation(s)? 
           ·· Were you using alcohol or other drugs at or around the time of the
              altercation(s)?                                
           ·· Was the client experiencing psychotic symptoms, such as threat/control-
              override (TCO) symptoms, at the time of the altercation? (A question
              asked to a third-party informant to gather information.)
           ·· Were you taking psychoactive medication at the time of the incident?
           ·· Can patterns or commonalities across this and other episodes be
              identified?                                    
                                  (Adapted from Borum et al., 1996)
         In the process of violence risk assessment, APMHNs will find that they must
         communicate their impressions, formulations, and recommendations to various
         third parties, either informally (e.g., in discussions with the client or significant
         others) or formally (e.g., in the context of a civil commitment proceeding or to
         the treatment team). At least in more formal contexts, care should be taken that
         impressions of the risk of violence and any recommended responses and inter-
         ventions are communicated clearly, and that any limitations of their opinions are
         made known (Otto, 2000).                            
                                                             
         References                                          
         American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2016). Practice guidelines for the psychiatric
          evaluation of adults (3rd ed.). American Psychiatric Association. https://doi.org/10
          .1176/appi.pn.2015.8a5                             
         Borum, R., Swartz, M., & Swanson, J. (1996). Assessing and managing violence risk in
          clinical practice. Journal of Practical Psychiatry and Behavioral Health, 2, 205–215.
         Buchanan, A., Binder, R., Norko, M., & Swartz, M. (2012). Resource document on
          psychiatric violence risk assessment. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 169(3), 340.
          https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.169.3.340    
         Dawson, J. M., & Langan, P. A. (1994). Murder in families. Bureau of Justice Statistics,
          U.S. Department of Justice. www.mentalillnesspolicy.org/consequences/1000-hom
         Otto, R. K. (2000). Assessing and managing violence risk in outpatient settings. Journal of
          Clinical Psychology, 56(10), 1239–1262.            
         Racine, M. (2018). Chronic pain and suicide risk: A comprehensive review. Progress
          in Neuro-psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 87, 269–280. https://doi:
          10.1016/j                                          
         Sadock, B., Ahmad, S., & Sadock, V. (2019). Kaplan & Sadock’s pocket handbook of
          clinical psychiatry (6th ed.). Wolters Kluwer.

=== Page 162 (1 cols) ===
Assessment of Risk for Violent Behaviors 151
       Shea, S. C. (1998). The chronological assessment of suicide events: A practical interviewing
         strategy for eliciting suicidal ideation. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 59(suppl 20),
         58–72.                                              
       Shea, S. C. (2002). The practical art of suicide assessment: A guide for mental health
         professionals and substance abuse counselors. Wiley.
       Shea, S. C. (2004). The delicate art of eliciting suicidal ideation. Psychiatric Annals, 34,
         385–400.                                            
       Shea, S. C. (2009). Suicide assessment: Part 2: Uncovering suicidal intent using the
         chronological assessment of suicide events (CASE Approach). Psychiatric Times.
         www.psychiatrictimes.com/suicide/suicide-assessment-part-2-uncovering-suicidal
         -intentusing-case-approach                          
       Torrey, E. F. (2006). Violence and schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 88(1–3), 3–4.
         https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2006.09.010        
       World Health Organization (WHO). (2014, January). Global status report on violence
         prevention 2014. World Health Organization. www.medicinecontact.com/world-report
         -on-violence-and-prevention-world-health-organization
       World Health Organization. (2019). Suicide in the world: Global health estimates. World
         Health Organization. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/326948

=== Page 163 (1 cols) ===
4   Practice Guidelines  for                        
             Cultural  Assessments                           
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
         The term “culture” refers to a large and diverse set of mostly intangible aspects
         of social life: the values, beliefs, systems of language, communication, and prac-
         tices that people share and that can be used to define them as a collective (Cole,
         2020). It is important that advanced psychiatric mental health nurses (APMHNs)
         be aware that individuals present for psychiatric assessment from a wide range of
         cultural backgrounds, and that factors such as age, ethnicity, gender, race, reli-
         gion, and sexual orientation can shape a client’s personal and cultural identity,
         as well as influence their beliefs about, and communications with, mental health
         professionals, who, for example, the client may view as authority figures. In addi-
         tion, individuals from different backgrounds may differ in their understanding and
         views of mental illness, as well as in their preferences for psychiatric treatment,
         particularly given cross-cultural differences in the possible stigma attached to
         psychiatric disorders (Abdullah & Brown, 2011; Angermeyer & Dietrich, 2006;
         Jimenez et al., 2012; Lim, 2015).                   
          Cultural differences also can be associated with disparities in medical care and
         health outcomes (Gone & Trimble, 2012; Hall-Lipsy & Chisholm-Burns, 2010;
         Thomas et al., 2011). Gone and Trimble (2012) report that American Indians and
         Alaska Natives suffer from specific mental health disparities, including dispro-
         portionately high rates of substance abuse, post-traumatic stress, youth behavior
         problems, and suicide. In their literature review investigating whether race, eth-
         nicity, or sex are associated with disparities in medication treatment, Hall-Lipsy
         and Chisholm-Burns (2010) found significant disparities among racial/ethnic
         minorities and women. With the aim of eliminating health disparities, achiev-
         ing health equity has been a goal of Healthy People 2030. However, despite the
         improvement in the health status of the US population as a whole, racial/ethnic
         minorities continue to lag behind whites, with a quality of life diminished by
         illness from preventable chronic diseases and a life span cut short by premature
         death (Thomas et al., 2011). Healthy People 2030 describes a vision for all peo-
         ple in the United States to achieve their full potential for health and well-being
         across the life span, which will benefit society as a whole. Gaining such benefits
         requires eliminating health disparities, achieving health equity, attaining health
         literacy, and strengthening physical, social, and economic environments (Pronk
         et al., 2021).                                      
         DOI: 10.4324/9781003137597-5

=== Page 164 (1 cols) ===
Practice Guidelines for Cultural Assessments 153
         Consequently, the relevance of cultural factors to both diagnosis and treatment
       strongly suggests the potential benefits of identifying each client’s cultural beliefs
       during the initial psychiatric evaluation, as such beliefs can influence the thera-
       peutic alliance, promote diagnostic accuracy, and enable appropriate treatment
       planning (American Psychiatric Association [APA], 2013). The APA (2013) rec-
       ommends three guidelines for doing so.                
                                                             
       Guideline 1: Assess the client’s need for an interpreter
       For many clients, the need for an interpreter and the appropriateness of different
       interpreter options should be identified during the initial visit. Although language-
       concordant clinicians or trained in-person interpreters have typically been used,
       other ways for accessing professional interpreters are increasingly available, such
       as telephonic- and video-based options, as well as remote interpreting services.
       Some clients who are deaf or hard of hearing may prefer to communicate through
       an in-person or video-based sign language interpreter, whereas others may prefer
       to communicate through other approaches, such as lip reading, face-to-face key-
       boards, and writing.                                  
                                                             
       Guideline 2: Assess cultural factors related to the client’s social environment
       There is substantial heterogeneity as to how clients gain support or feel estranged
       from cultural networks, making it important to explore the client’s views and feel-
       ings. When present, social networks (e.g., religious affiliations, tribal supports,
       military command structure) within a client’s culture can help to strengthen their
       social ties and supports. For example, in many cultures, families are an important
       source of support during times of illness, and in some cultures, treatment deci-
       sions are made by family members rather than by the individual client.
                                                             
       Guideline 3: Assess the client’s personal/cultural beliefs and cultural expla-
          nations of psychiatric illness                     
                                                             
       Individuals from a specific cultural group will have a wide range of beliefs. Some
       clients may use culturally specific treatments, such as medications, supplements,
       health practices, and consultations with culturally specific healers. Family mem-
       bers or members of a client’s cultural group may also be helpful in explaining the
       client’s belief systems, as well as whether their current beliefs and behaviors are
       or are not in keeping with those of the client’s cultural group. Typical examples
       are spiritual beliefs that are not part of an organized religion, or cultural or reli-
       gious rituals.                                        
         Lim (2015) recommends that healthcare providers use the Diagnostic
       and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) (APA, 2013), Cultural
       Formulation Interview (CFI) as a cultural assessment instrument to learn about
       cultures that are represented among their clients, as well as to improve their ability
       to assess cultural factors that are relevant to diagnosis and treatment. The DSM-5

=== Page 165 (1 cols) ===
154 Practice Guidelines for Cultural Assessments    
         presents two versions of the CFI: (1) the CFI—Client Version, with 16 questions;
         and (2) the CFI—Informant Version, with 17 questions. The questions for each
         version are listed below for APMHNs to review so that they can use the ones they
         deem most relevant during the initial psychiatric evaluation. Detailed information
         about and instructions for each of these questions, as well as additional extended
         questions, can be found in the DSM-5 (APA, 2013).   
                                                             
          I. The CFI—Client Version includes four assessment domains and a total of
           16 questions.                                     
                                                             
                                                             
         Domain 1: Cultural Definition of the Problem        
          1. What brings you here today? (Problem identification)
          2. Sometimes people have different ways of describing their problem to their
           family, friends, or others in their community. How would you describe your
           problem to them? (Description of problem)         
          3. What troubles you most about your problem? (Consequences of problem)
                                                             
         Domain 2: Cultural Perceptions of Cause, Context, and Support
          4. Why do you think this is happening to you? What troubles do you think are
           the causes of your problem? (Cause)               
          5. What do your family, friends, or others in your community think is causing
           your problem? (Cause)                             
          6. Are there any kinds of supports that make your problem better, such as sup-
           port from family, friends, or others? (Supports)  
          7. Are there any kinds of stresses that make your problem worse, such as dif-
           ficulties with money or family problems? (Stressors)
          8. For you, what are the most important aspects of your background or identity?
           (Role of cultural identity)                       
          9. Are there any aspects of your background or identity that you believe make a
           difference to your problem? (Role of cultural identity)
         10. Are there any aspects of your background or identity that are causing other
           concerns or difficulties for you? (Role of cultural identity)
                                                             
         Domain 3: Cultural Factors Affecting Self-          
         Coping and Past Help Seeking                        
         11. Sometimes people have various ways of dealing with problems like yours.
           What have you done on your own to cope with your problem? (Self-coping)
         12. Often people look for help from many different sources, including different
           kinds of doctors, helpers, or healers. In the past, what kinds of treatment,
           help, advice, or healing have you sought for you problem? (Past help seeking)
         13. Has anything prevented you from getting the help you need? (Barriers)

=== Page 166 (1 cols) ===
Practice Guidelines for Cultural Assessments 155
        14. What kinds of help do you think would be most useful to you at this time for
          your problem? (Useful self-coping skills)          
        15. Are there other kinds of help that your family, friends, or other people have
          suggested that you believe would be helpful for you now? (External help)
                                                             
       Domain 4: Clinician–Client Relationship               
                                                             
        16. Sometimes doctors and patients misunderstand each other because they come
          from different backgrounds or have different expectations. Have you been
          concerned about this kind of problem and is there anything we can do to pro-
          vide you with the care you need? (Relationship)    
        II. The CFI—Informant Version includes five assessment domains, and a total
          of 17 questions. It is used to collect collateral information from a client’s
          family, friends, or significant others who are familiar with the client’s current
          issues and life circumstances. This version can be used to obtain information
          supplemental to that obtained during the CFI—Client Version or if the client
          is not able to provide information themselves.     
                                                             
       Introduction for the Informant (client is assumed to be female and the inform-
       ant’s close friend):                                  
         “I would like to understand the problems that brought your friend here so that I
       can help you and her more effectively. Knowing more about your experiences and
       thoughts will help me to do that, so I will ask you some questions about what has
       happened and how you and she are dealing with it. I want you to know that there
       are no right or wrong answers.”                       
                                                             
       Domain 1: Relationship with the Client                
        1. How would you describe your relationship with her? (Description of
          relationship)                                      
                                                             
       Domain 2: Cultural Definition of the Problem          
                                                             
        2. What brings your friend here today? (Problem identification)
        3. Sometimes people have different ways of describing the problem to family,
          friends, or others in their community. How would you describe her problem
          to them? (Description of problem)                  
        4. What troubles you most about her problem? (Consequences of problem)
                                                             
       Domain 3: Cultural Perceptions of Cause, Context, and Support
        5. Why do you think this is happening to her? And what do you think are the
          causes of her problem? (Cause)

=== Page 167 (1 cols) ===
156 Practice Guidelines for Cultural Assessments    
          6. What do her family, other friends, or others in the community think is causing
           her problem? (Cause)                              
          7. Are there any kinds of supports that make her problem better, such as from
           family, friends, or others? (Supports)            
          8. Are there any kinds of stresses that make her problem worse, such as difficul-
           ties with money or family problems? (Stressors)   
          9. For you, what are the most important aspects of her background or identity?
           (Role of cultural identity)                       
         10. Are there any aspects of her background or identity that make a difference to
           her problem? (Role of cultural identity)          
         11. Are there any aspects of her background or identity that are causing other
           concerns or difficulties for her? (Role of cultural identity)
                                                             
         Domain 4: Cultural Factors Affecting Self-          
         Coping and Past Help Seeking                        
         12. Sometimes people have various ways of dealing with problems like hers.
           What has she done on her own to cope with her problem? (Self-coping)
         13. Often people also look for help from many different sources, such as dif-
           ferent kinds of doctors, helpers, or healers. In the past, what kinds of treat-
           ment, help, advice, or healing has she sought for her problem? (Past help
           seeking)                                          
         14. Has anything prevented her from getting the help she needs? (Barriers)
                                                             
         Domain 5: Cultural Factors Affecting Current Help Seeking
         15. What kinds of help do you believe would be most useful to her at this time for
           her problem? (Perceived needs)                    
         16. Are there other kinds of help that her family, friends, or other people
           have suggested that you believe would be helpful for her now? (Perceived
           expectation)                                      
         17. Have you been concerned about doctors and patients misunderstanding each
           other because they come from different backgrounds? And is there anything
           that we can do to provide her with the care she needs? (Clinician–client
           relationship)                                     
                                  (Adapted from DSM-5, APA, 2013)
                                                             
                                                             
         References                                          
         Abdullah, T., & Brown, T. L. (2011). Mental illness stigma and ethnocultural beliefs,
          values, and norms: An integrative review. Clinical Psychology Review, 31(6),
          934–948.                                           
         American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
          mental disorders (DSM-5) (5th ed., text rev.). Author.

=== Page 168 (1 cols) ===
Practice Guidelines for Cultural Assessments 157
       Angermeyer, M. C., & Dietrich, S. (2006). Public beliefs about and attitudes towards people
         with mental illness: A review of population studies. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica,
         113(3), 163–179.                                    
       Cole, N. L. (2020, August). So what is culture, exactly? ThoughtCo. www.thoughtco.com›
         culture-definition-4135409                          
       Gone, J. P., & Trimble, J. E. (2012). American Indian and Alaska Native mental health:
         Diverse perspectives on enduring disparities. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology,
         8, 131–160.                                         
       Hall-Lipsy, E. A., & Chisholm-Burns, M. A. (2010). Pharmacotherapeutic disparities:
         Racial, ethnic, and sex variations in medication treatment. American Journal of Health:
         System Pharmacy, 67(6), 462–468. http://doi: 10.2146/ajhp090161. PMID: 20208053
       Jimenez, D. E., Bartels, S. J., Cardenas, V., Daliwal, S. S., & Alegría, M. (2012). Cultural
         beliefs and mental health treatment preferences of ethnically diverse older adult
         consumers in primary care. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 20(6), 533–542.
       Lim, R. F. (2015). Clinical manual of cultural psychiatry (2nd ed.). American Psychiatric
         Publishing.                                         
       Pronk, N., Kleinman, D. V., Goekler, S. F., Ochiai, E., Blakey, C., & Brewer, K. H. (2021).
         Promoting health and well-being in Healthy People 2030. Journal of Public Health
         Management and Practice, 27(Suppl 6), S242–S248. https://doi.org/10.1097/PHH
         .0000000000001254                                   
       Thomas, S. B., Quinn, S. C., Butler, J., Fryer, C. S., & Garza, M. A. (2011). Toward a fourth
         generation of disparities research to achieve health equity. Annual Review of Public
         Health, 32, 399–416. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031210-101136

=== Page 169 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

=== Page 170 (1 cols) ===
Index                                                 
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
                                                             
       Page numbers in bold indicate a table on the corresponding page
                                                             
       aculalia 17                                           
       acute stress disorder (ASD) 76–77;                    
         see also trauma-and stressor-related                
         disorders                                           
       addiction, neurobiological findings 98–99;            
         see also alcohol use disorder (AUD);                
         substance use disorders (SUDs)                      
       advanced psychiatric mental health                    
         nursing (APMHN) 1–2; see also clinical              
         interview                                           
       aerophagia 17                                         
       affect 17, 33, 46, 57, 66, 84, 94, 119                
       aggressive behaviors 146; anamnestic risk             
         assessment 149; psychiatric evaluation              
         148–149; risk factors 146–148;                      
         screening questions 149–150; see also               
         violent behavior                                    
       agnosia 17                                            
       agoraphobia 17                                        
       akathisia 18                                          
       alcohol use disorder (AUD) 96–97;                     
         diagnostic criteria 100–101, 106–109;               
         diagnostic criteria of intoxication 101,            
         104; diagnostic criteria of withdrawal              
         101–102; interviewing techniques                    
         102–104; neurobiological theories                   
         98–99; psychiatric evaluation 104–107;              
         treatment 109                                       
       alogia 18                                             
       Alzheimer’s disease (AD) 110; DSM-5                   
         criteria for neurocognitive disorder 113,           
         114; interviewing techniques 115–117;               
         see also neurocognitive disorders                   
         (NCDs)                                              
       American Psychiatric Association (APA):               
         Diagnostic and Statistical Manual                   
         of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) 22;                     
         Practice Guidelines for the Psychiatric             
                                Evaluation of Adults 12–15; see also
                                Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
                                Mental Disorders (DSM-5)     
                               anamnestic risk assessment 149
                               anhedonia 18                  
                               anorexia nervosa 87; diagnostic criteria
                                91; interviewing techniques 91–92;
                                psychiatric evaluation 92–96; symptoms
                                95; treatment 96; see also feeding and
                                eating disorders             
                               antidepressants 55, 58        
                               antipsychotics 25–26, 34–35   
                               anxiety disorders 17, 59; developmental
                                disorders and 60; diagnosis of
                                generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
                                64–67; diagnostic criteria 63; differential
                                diagnosis 63; DSM-5 classification of
                                60; neurological theories 61, 62
                               apraxia 18                    
                               assessment tools: Chronological
                                Assessment of Suicide Events (CASE)
                                approach 140–145; for generalized
                                anxiety disorder (GAD) 66; for
                                neurocognitive disorders (NCDs) 113,
                                120; screening questions for aggressive/
                                violent behaviors 149–150    
                               attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
                                (ADHD) 44                    
                               autism spectrum disorder 34   
                               avoidance 85                  
                               benzodiazepine 55             
                               binge-eating disorder 87, 95; see also
                                feeding and eating disorders 
                               bipolar disorder 34, 48; diagnostic criteria
                                48–50; differential diagnosis 51–52;
                                hypomanic episodes 49–50; interviewing
                                techniques 52–54; manic episodes 49;

=== Page 171 (1 cols) ===
160 Index                                           
          neurobiological theories 52; psychiatric           
          evaluation 54–58; treatment 57–59                  
         blackout 18, 105                                    
         borderline personality disorder 124;                
          differential diagnosis 125; DSM-5                  
          criteria 125, 130–131; interviewing                
          techniques 126–128; psychiatric                    
          evaluation 128–130; treatment 131–132              
         brain-derived neurotrophic factor                   
          (BDNF) 39                                          
         bulimia nervosa 87; see also feeding and            
          eating disorders                                   
         bupropion 55                                        
         catalepsy 18                                        
         Chisholm-Burns, M. A. 152                           
         Chronological Assessment of Suicide                 
          Events (CASE) approach: exploration                
          of immediate suicide events 144–145;               
          exploration of past suicide events 144;            
          exploration of presenting suicide events           
          142–143; exploration of recent suicide             
          events 143–145; validity techniques                
          140–142                                            
         circumstantiality 18                                
         citalopram 55                                       
         clang association 18                                
         clinical interview 1, 3, 14–15; assessment of       
          hallucinations 28–29; closing 10–11; data          
          collection of the client’s mental status           
          9–10; engagement phase 5–9; goals of 4;            
          see also interviewing techniques                   
         Clock Drawing Test 120                              
         closing the interview 10–11                         
         cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) 68               
         Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale 31           
         compulsions 70; see also obsessive-                 
          compulsive disorder (OCD)                          
         concrete thinking 18                                
         confabulation 18                                    
         coprolalia 18                                       
         cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CTSC)             
          circuit 61, 72                                     
         countertransference 10, 42                          
         cultural beliefs, psychiatric evaluation and        
          152–153                                            
         Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI) 153;           
          Client Version 154–155; Informant                  
          Version 155–156                                    
         cyclothymic disorder 48                             
         data collection of the client’s mental status       
          9–10                                               
         decompensation 18, 31                               
                                delirium 18; neurocognitive disorders
                                 and 110                     
                                delusions 19, 31, 33; assessment of 29, 30
                                depressive disorders 34–36; diagnostic
                                 criteria 36–37; glutamate hypothesis
                                 39–40; interviewing techniques
                                 40–43; monoamine hypothesis 37–38;
                                 neurotrophic hypothesis 39; see also
                                 major depressive disorder (MDD)
                                Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
                                 Mental Disorders (DSM-5) 22, 38, 40,
                                 41, 59, 70, 72, 87, 97, 110; classification
                                 of alcohol-related disorders 100;
                                 classification of anxiety disorders
                                 60; diagnostic criteria of alcohol
                                 intoxication 101, 104; diagnostic
                                 criteria of alcohol use disorder 100–101,
                                 106–109; diagnostic criteria of alcohol
                                 withdrawal 101–102; diagnostic
                                 criteria of anorexia nervosa 89, 91, 95;
                                 diagnostic criteria of anxiety disorders
                                 63; diagnostic criteria of bipolar disorder
                                 48–52; diagnostic criteria of bipolar
                                 II disorder 57–58; diagnostic criteria
                                 of borderline personality disorder
                                 125, 130–131; diagnostic criteria of
                                 depressive disorders 36–37; diagnostic
                                 criteria of generalized anxiety disorder
                                 (GAD) 67; diagnostic criteria of major
                                 depressive disorder 46–57; diagnostic
                                 criteria of NCD due to AD 120;
                                 diagnostic criteria of neurocognitive
                                 disorders (NCDs) 113, 114; diagnostic
                                 criteria of obsessive-compulsive
                                 disorder (OCD) 70; diagnostic criteria
                                 of post-traumatic stress disorder
                                 (PTSD) 84–86; diagnostic criteria
                                 of schizophrenia 23–24, 33–34;
                                 diagnostic criteria of substance use
                                 disorder (SUD) 98; diagnostic criteria
                                 of trauma-and stressor-related disorders
                                 78–79; see also psychiatric evaluation;
                                 symptoms                    
                                differential diagnosis: anxiety disorders
                                 63; borderline personality disorder
                                 125; depressive disorders 36–37;
                                 major depressive disorder (MDD) 47;
                                 obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
                                 70; post-traumatic stress disorder
                                 (PTSD) 86; schizophrenia 24; trauma-
                                 and stressor-related disorders 79
                                dopamine neuronal pathways: mesocortical
                                 25; mesolimbic 25; nigrostriatal 25;
                                 tuberoinfundibular 25

=== Page 172 (1 cols) ===
Index 161      
       drug use disorder (DUD) 96–97                         
       dyadic system 41–42                                   
       dysphoria 19                                          
       dystonia 19                                           
       early onset neurocognitive disorders                  
         110, 114                                            
       eating disorders see feeding and eating               
         disorders                                           
       echolalia 19                                          
       egocentric 19                                         
       emergency room, mental health assessment              
         in 10                                               
       empathy 42                                            
       engagement phase, clinical interview 5;               
         data collection of the client’s mental              
         status 8–9; establishing rapport 7–8;               
         open-ended questions 8; restating and               
         validating the client 7–8; verbal                   
         introduction 6                                      
       euphoria 19                                           
       feeding and eating disorders 87;                      
         neurobiological findings 89                         
       folie a deux 19                                       
       formal thought disorder 19                            
       fugue 19                                              
       gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA) 27, 28,                
         62, 99                                              
       generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) 62,                
         64–67; interviewing techniques 63–64;               
         psychiatric evaluation 64–67; treatment             
         67–68; see also anxiety disorders                   
       Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item                   
         scale 68                                            
       glutamate 27, 28, 99; depressive disorders            
         and 39–40                                           
       Gone, J. P. 152                                       
       Hall-Lipsy, E. A. 152                                 
       hallucinations 20, 25, 33, 105; alcohol use           
         disorder (AUD) and 102; assessment of               
         28–29                                               
       healing process 3                                     
       Heerema, E. 115                                       
       homicide 135                                          
       hyperprolactinemia 25                                 
       hypomanic episodes 49–50, 57–58                       
       idea of reference 20                                  
       International Classification of Diseases              
         (ICD) 22                                            
       interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) 48                  
                               interpreter, assessing the client’s need
                                for 153                      
                               interviewing techniques: assessment
                                of alcohol use disorder 102–104;
                                assessment of anorexia nervosa 91–92;
                                assessment of bipolar disorders 52–54;
                                assessment of borderline personality
                                disorder 126–128; assessment of
                                depressive disorders 40–43; assessment
                                of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
                                63–64; assessment of NCD due to AD
                                115–117; assessment of obsessive-
                                compulsive disorder (OCD) 72–73;
                                assessment of post-traumatic stress
                                disorder 80–81; assessment of psychotic
                                states of schizophrenia 28–30; inquiring
                                about suicidal thoughts 139–145;
                                see also Chronological Assessment
                                of Suicide Events (CASE) approach;
                                clinical interview; Cultural Formulation
                                Interview (CFI); psychiatric evaluation
                               Johnson, K. 4                 
                               ketamine 40                   
                               Lipari, R. N. 96              
                               loosening of association 20   
                               lorazepam 68                  
                               major depressive disorder (MDD) 35, 36;
                                differential diagnosis 47; psychiatric
                                evaluation 43–46; symptoms 46;
                                treatment 46–48              
                               manic episodes 49             
                               mental illness 1, 152; violence and
                                135–136                      
                               mesocortical dopamine pathway 25
                               mesolimbic dopamine pathway 25
                               Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE)
                                118, 120                     
                               monoamine hypothesis, depressive
                                disorders 37–38              
                               mood 20, 33, 45, 57, 66, 84–86, 94,
                                119, 131                     
                               naltrexone 99                 
                               National Institute of Mental Health 1
                               National Survey on Drug Use and Health
                                (NSDUH) 97                   
                               neologism 20                  
                               neurobiological findings and theories: of
                                addiction 98–99; of bipolar disorder
                                52; of depressive disorders 37–40;

=== Page 173 (1 cols) ===
162 Index                                           
          of feeding and eating disorders 89,                
          90, 98–100; of obsessive-compulsive                
          disorder (OCD) 70, 72; of post-                    
          traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 80; of            
          schizophrenia 24–28                                
         neurocognitive disorders (NCDs) 113;                
          Alzheimer’s disease (AD) 110;                      
          behavioral disturbance and 113;                    
          delirium and 110; diagnostic criteria              
          113, 114; early onset 110, 114;                    
          etiological subtype specifiers 111–113;            
          interviewing techniques 115–117;                   
          psychiatric evaluation 117–119; risk               
          factors 110; screening inventories                 
          120; treatment 120, 123; vascular                  
          dementia 111                                       
         neuroleptics 31                                     
         neurotransmitters 52; dopamine 24–26;               
          glutamate 27, 28; monoamine 37–38                  
         neurotrophic hypothesis, depressive                 
          disorders 39                                       
         nigrostriatal dopamine pathway 25                   
         N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors               
          27, 28                                             
         obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)                 
          68; diagnostic criteria 70; differential           
          diagnosis 70; interviewing techniques              
          72–73; neurobiological theories 70, 72;            
          psychiatric evaluation 74–76; symptoms             
          69, 70; treatment 76                               
         open-ended questions 8, 43                          
         orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) 72                       
         other-directed violence 135, 145–146                
         paranoid ideation 20, 31, 131                       
         paroxetine 68                                       
         persistent depressive disorder 35                   
         personality disorder(s) 123; aggressive             
          behaviors 146; borderline 124–132;                 
          DSM-5 clusters 123, 124; risk factors              
          for aggressive and violent behaviors               
          146–148                                            
         pharmacological treatment: antidepressants          
          55, 58; antipsychotics 25–26, 34–35; for           
          bipolar disorder 59; generalized anxiety           
          disorder (GAD) 68; neuroleptics 31; for            
          post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)              
          87; see also treatment                             
         phobia 59                                           
         pica 87; see also feeding and eating                
          disorders                                          
         post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)               
          62, 76–77; differential diagnosis                  
                                 86; interviewing techniques 80–81;
                                 neurobiological theories 80; postpartum
                                 87; psychiatric evaluation 82–86;
                                 symptoms 80; treatment 87; see also
                                 trauma-and stressor-related disorders
                                Practice Guidelines for the Psychiatric
                                 Evaluation of Adults 12–15  
                                premenstrual dysphoric disorder 35
                                preoccupation of thought 20  
                                professionalism 10, 42       
                                psychiatric evaluation 1, 22; assessing
                                 the client’s need for an interpreter
                                 153; clinical interview 3–11; diagnosis
                                 impression and treatment plan 16;
                                 diagnosis of aggressive/violent behaviors
                                 147–148; diagnosis of alcohol use
                                 disorder (AUD) 104–107; diagnosis of
                                 anorexia nervosa 92–96; diagnosis of
                                 bipolar disorders 54–58; diagnosis of
                                 borderline personality disorder 128–130;
                                 diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder
                                 (GAD) 64–67; diagnosis of MDD 43–46;
                                 diagnosis of NCD due to AD 117–119;
                                 diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive
                                 disorder (OCD) 74–76; diagnosis of post-
                                 traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 82–86;
                                 diagnosis of schizophrenia 30–35; family
                                 history 13, 16; guidelines 11–15; history
                                 of present illness 12, 15; impression and
                                 plan 14; inquiring about suicidal thoughts
                                 136–137, 139–140; management of
                                 aggressive, violent or homicidal clients
                                 148–149; medical history 12–13, 16;
                                 mental status examination 13–14, 16;
                                 personal and social history 13, 15;
                                 psychiatric history 12, 15; review of
                                 systems 13, 16; substance use history 12,
                                 15; see also clinical interview; Cultural
                                 Formulation Interview (CFI) 
                                psychomotor agitation 21     
                                psychopharmacology 1–2       
                                psychosis: assessment of hallucinations
                                 28–29; assessment of thoughts and
                                 delusions 29, 30            
                                risk factors: for aggressive and violent
                                 behaviors 146–148; for neurocognitive
                                 disorders (NCDs) 110; for suicide
                                 137–139                     
                                rumination 21                
                                Saxena, S. 72                
                                scales: activities of daily living (ADL)
                                 120; Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating

=== Page 174 (1 cols) ===
Scale 31; Generalized Anxiety Disorder              
         7-item scale 66, 68                                 
       schizophrenia 22–23; assessment of                    
         hallucinations 28–29; assessment                    
         of thoughts and delusions 29, 30;                   
         diagnostic criteria 23–24; hypothesis of            
         glutamate neurotransmitter abnormality              
         in the brain 27, 28; hypothesis of                  
         neuroanatomy of dopamine neuronal                   
         pathways in the brain 24–26; psychiatric            
         evaluation 30–34; symptoms 33–34;                   
         treatment 34–35                                     
       self-directed violence 135                            
       self-reflection 42                                    
       sertraline 55                                         
       Shea, S. C. 4, 10, 28; Psychiatric                    
         Interviewing 40                                     
       Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire            
         (SPMSQ) 120                                         
       speech patterns 21                                    
       substance use disorders (SUDs):                       
         depressive disorders and 44; diagnostic             
         criteria 98; major depressive disorder              
         (MDD) and 47; neurobiological theories              
         98–100; see also alcohol use disorder               
         (AUD)                                               
       suggestibility 21                                     
       suicidal ideation 21, 31; assessing risk              
         for suicide 136–137; Chronological                  
         Assessment of Suicide Events (CASE)                 
         approach 140–145; psychiatric                       
         evaluation and 139–140; see also                    
         Chronological Assessment of Suicide                 
         Events (CASE) approach                              
       suicide 135; intent thought disorder 21;              
         risk factors 137–139                                
       sympathy 42                                           
       symptoms: of alcohol intoxication                     
         101, 104; of alcohol use disorder                   
         (AUD) 100–104, 107–109; of alcohol                  
         withdrawal 101–102; of anorexia                     
         nervosa 95; of bipolar disorder 48–50;              
         of depressive disorders 36; of major                
         depressive disorder (MDD) 46; of                    
         obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)                 
         69, 70; of post-traumatic stress disorder           
         (PTSD) 80, 84–86; of schizophrenia                  
                                              Index 163      
                                23–24, 33–34; of trauma-and stressor-
                                related disorders 78–79      
                               Synthroid 45                  
                               Terlizzi, E. P. 36            
                               transference 10, 42           
                               trauma-and stressor-related disorders 76;
                                diagnostic criteria 78–79; differential
                                diagnosis 79                 
                               trazodone 55                  
                               treatment: alcohol use disorder (AUD)
                                109; anorexia nervosa 96; bipolar
                                disorder 57–59; borderline personality
                                disorder 131–132; cultural factors
                                152–153; generalized anxiety disorder
                                (GAD) 66; major depressive disorder
                                (MDD) 47–48; neurocognitive disorders
                                (NCDs) 123; obsessive-compulsive
                                disorder (OCD) 76; post-traumatic stress
                                disorder (PTSD) 87; schizophrenia
                                34–35; for violent behaviors 136
                               triage, psychiatric evaluation in 10
                               Trimble, J. E. 152            
                               tuberoinfundibular dopamine pathway 25
                               United States, National Mental Health Act
                                (1946) 1                     
                               Van Horn, S. L. 96            
                               Vanderhoef, D. 4              
                               vascular dementia 111         
                               venlafaxine XR 55             
                               ventral tegmental area (VTA) 99
                               Villarroel, M. A. 36          
                               violent behavior: anamnestic risk
                                assessment 149; homicide 135; mental
                                illness and 135–136; other-directed
                                145–146; psychiatric evaluation
                                148–149; risk factors 146–148;
                                screening questions 149–150; suicide
                                135; see also personality disorder(s);
                                suicidal ideation            
                               World Health Organization (WHO) 135
                               Zisook, S. 48                 
                               Zyprexa 31, 35

=== Page 175 (1 cols) ===
CONTENT_NOT_EXTRACTED

